After the introductions, the prefaces, and the translator’s notes, the first two words I read by Pope Francis were “Apostolic joy.”His reflections on living the Christian faith begins with this sentence:Apostolic joy is nourished by the contemplation of Jesus Christ, that is, by observing how he moved about, how he preached, how he healed, how he saw the world… The heart of the priest should be steeped in this contemplation and through it resolve the main challenge of his life: his friendship with Jesus Christ.In order to set us dialogue with Christ, Pope Francis begins by meditating on the kinds of conversations that Christ has in the Gospels.  But before I move on the the main content of this chapter, I still want to linger on the opening words.The main context in which I hear the slightly-jargony ‘apostolic’ is the Nicene Creed, when, at Mass, the congregation says that we believe in “one holy, catholic, and apostolic church.”  So, as I use it, it’s a word about lineage and provenance.   When we talk about something being apostolic, we mean something handed down carefully from the apostles to now, something safeguarded and precious.It’s hard for me to not assume anything that important must be something solemn.  Maybe something fiddly and detailed like canon law, maybe something mysterious and easy to be confused by, like the Trinity.  But in the opening words of his book, Pope Francis reminds us that our birthright is joy as much as it is anything else.  And we get an example of how we can stumblingly inherit that joy, when Pope Francis begins to narrate how Christ dealt in dialogue with those who sought to entrap him.In Luke 20, some Sadducees ask Christ what would become of a woman who married the first of seven brothers, and then, when he died, married the next one in line, and so on and so forth, til she’d married and been widowed by them all.  In the afterlife, would she be married to all of them?  Just the first?Francis writes that this question was not asked in good faith, and so,[T]he Lord responds by looking toward the eschatological horizon… This ploy is so shameful that the Lord doesn’t even bother to argue with the tricksters: he responds by simply asserting the sublimity of the glorified life (Luke 20:27-40)Jesus said to them, “Those who belong to this age marry and are given in marriage; but those who are considered worthy of a place in that age and in the resurrection from the dead neither marry nor are given in marriage. Indeed they cannot die anymore, because they are like angels and are children of God, being children of the resurrection. And the fact that the dead are raised Moses himself showed, in the story about the bush, where he speaks of the Lord as the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. Now he is God not of the dead, but of the living; for to him all of them are alive.” Then some of the scribes answered, “Teacher, you have spoken well.” For they no longer dared to ask him another question.Even under interrogation, Christ is offering the inheritance of apostolic joy.  Instead of responding in anger or withdrawing from the gotcha-conversation, He is pointing to something beyond the current conflict, a vision of  joy and peace that makes the argument on the table seem small.Whenever we are hemmed in in argument (theological or not), we always have the option to respond with joy.  Instead to becoming angry or frightened in defense of the idea we are trying to protect, we can offer it to our interlocutor with joy, in the same way you hold out your favorite book to loan to a friend, or sneak sideways looks at your child, when showing them your favorite movie, hoping for an opportunity to share your joy.When I am in this frame of mind, I’m not only taking the chance to kindle delight in my debating partner, but to strengthen my own happiness and raise it to the level of my attention.  It’s why I love doing alumni interviews or organizing theatre trips.When I’m in an argument or debate, I want to follow Christ’s example and try to offer the person the source of my joy, not a rebuke to their approach or a gotcha of my own.  I want to offer them the truth or beauty I’m fighting to share, and see them take it up with joy, not to knuckle under on a technicality.  And I want to approach disagreements in a way that makes it easy and inviting for my opponent to share their joy, so I can happily notice and admit when I’ve erred.
In 2014, I’m reading and blogging through Pope Francis/Cardinal Bergoglio’s Open Mind, Faithful Heart: Reflections on Following Jesus.  Every Monday, I’ll be writing about the next meditation in the book, so you’re welcome to peruse them all and/or read along.In Pope Francis’s second meditation, he talks about the role of a priest and one of the pitfalls of that vocation:An abyss separates the priest from the religious functionary; they are qualitatively different.  Sadly, however, the priest can be slowly transformed, little by little, into a religious functionary.  When that happens, the priesthood ceases to be a bridge, and the priest is no longer a pontifex, a builder of bridges; he ends up simply having a function to perform…Seeking out Christ and finding him is not the anodyne exercise of a Pelagian spirit; rather it assumes that there is sin and repentance.Not being a priest myself, this chapter made me reflect a little on what I ask from priests and other consecrated religious.  When I’m at Mass, or interacting with a priest at church, am I looking for opportunities to have him make connections for me, or am I nitpicking the liturgy.  (Answer: too frequently the latter).Back in California, I had an excellent coworker who, when she had to delegate a new task to me, especially if it was on short notice, would ask me, “Is there something else I can take off your plate?”  One change I could make, in response to Pope Francis’s essay, is to start asking more often how I can take some of the functionary burden off a priest.  That seems like a particularly good response if I’m starting to get tetchy about logistical matters.But another option is to make sure I’m giving a priest or other religious the chance to offer me a bridge.  If my interactions are cursory and perfunctory (Mass and a quick handshake on the threshhold), how much of a chance does my parish priest have to show me the footpath and invite me across.  So, although I sometimes may want to relieve the burden on a priest, perhaps other times I would want to burden him differently, by making sure I’m asking more of him than a smoothly running service.Trying to burden others appropriately isn’t only difficult when I relate to priests.  When I interact with friends and others, I want to ask more often: am I just giving this person quotidian tasks and interactions to check off (“Hi.” “How was your weekend?”  “Good.”  “Mine, too.”)?  Am I asking for the things I really want and need, and giving them the opportunity to connect their wisdom and love to the place where I’m currently standing?There’s a joke (technically about tunnels, not bridges) that goes like this:When England and France were trying to build the Chunnel, they received a number of bids from construction companies for the digging job.  But the lowest bid was so much lower than the competitors (and the projected time so much shorted) that the commissioners called in the contractor to explain himself.“It’s a matter of efficiency,” he said.  “I plan to put one team on British soil and one in France.  Both groups will dig simultaneously and meet in the middle.  Hey-presto, it’ll all be over by Christmas.”“But what if your calculations are off and the diggings don’t match up?”The contractor shrugged.  “Then, there will be two tunnels!”A bridge connects two endpoints, and it takes time and effort to find a path between them.  Without my honesty and openness, a priest who is trying to offer me a bridge must build out from his own relationship with Christ, lowering his experience like a drawbridge, hoping its entrance will land at my feet and beckon me on.  If I want to invite people to build bridges for me, I need to interact with them personally, non-generically, so they have the chance to set their bearing accordingly.And there’s no reason I should only make that adjustment for priests.  Christ seeks us out individually, so, if I want to let others be Christ to me, I need to be an individual to them, not brusque or functionary-ish myself.  I want to be able to return the favor, too, and survey where my friends and interlocutors are actually located, so I can build bridges from their side of the shore, instead of striking out impetuously from mine, and asking them to come the long way round to wherever I’ve made landfall.
Pope Francis opened his book with joy, and he returns to it again in only the third chapter.  The word that came to mind, reading this section, was epousios.  Epousios is the word in the Our Father that we translate as ‘daily,’ but it’s a difficult word to pin down.  The word is a hapax legomenon — it has only been found, in the whole corpus of Greek writing, in the Lord’s Prayer.St. Jerome translated epousios as supersubstantialem in his Vulgate.  In English, it’s exactly what it looks like: supersubstantial.  So the one word describing God’s gift of bread can be as literally quotidian as ‘daily’ and as odd but promising as ‘supersubstantial.’That seems to be the kind of joy that Pope Francis writes about and is alight with.  It’s more that we could imagine asking for, and yet it is available to us daily, woven throughout the normal parts of our lives.We need to be faithful to this joy and not just “enjoy” it as something that belongs only to us.  The joy is there for our astonishment; it is there for us to communicate it to others.  This joy opens us to the freedom that comes with being children of God.  By placing us in God, this joy separates us from things that confine and imprison us and from situations that take away our freedom.  That is why the joyful heart is always growing freer.As a sign of Christ’s presence, joy shapes the habitual state of the consecrated person.  We therefore naturally seek out consolation not for its own sake, but as a sign of the Lord’s presence.Six or so years ago, when I was just starting college, I would have been terribly suspicious of that last paragraph.  I was terribly enthused about Kant and Stoicism, and both taught me to be suspicious of lusting after joy.  I preferred duty and serenity.  I liked, unironically, “Falling in Love with Love” from Cinderella.Enjoying joy too much seemed self-indulgent, and liable to lead to corruption.  How could I trust myself to act rightly if my actions were swayed by the feelings I had about the people I was interacting with?  Joy or resentment, each was suspect as a distraction from moral law, or, at least my best approximation of it.Oddly, I never imposed or thought to impose this rigidity on the joy I did feel.  I had what Pope Francis describes as one of the fruits of joy, “missionary enthusiasm,” but only for books, plays, mathematics.  I showed them to people, but it wouldn’t have occurred to me to show off people to people, or to love someone with that kind of fierce particularity.I still have moments of suspicion or misgiving about joy that’s linked to something as fallible or confusing as people, but, luckily, I feel it mostly when I’m ruminating on it in the abstract, not as a distraction from joy when it occurs.
I’m reading this book one chapter at a time, so I keep being surprised every week to find out that the latest chapter is still on joy.  This chapter is grounded in his own experience as a priest, and the opportunities to welcome or reject joy that his vocation affords him.  The everyday demands of the parishioners are his apostolic responsibility, and he discusses the importance of responding to all of them with deliberate joy, not resignation or rote action:The people are demanding in matters that relate to religion.  Just as they are generally faithful in fulfilling their promises, so they expect those who are responsible for providing pastoral care to be faithful in fulfilling their duties.  The priest does not belong to himself.  He may sometimes try to escape to other things, but all those “other things” count for little in comparison with the mother who makes him walk many blocks to bless her house.  Constancy in our apostolic work will create foundations.  I don’t think the hands of a priest should simply go through routine gestures when baptizing; rather, they should tremble with emotion because at that moment he is performing decisive gestures that become a foundation.This is one of the reasons I’m particularly glad to be back in D.C. and back near the Dominican House of Studies.  I like meeting and talking to the friars in residence and the nuns at school because there’s a sense that consecrated religious are people upon whom you can totally rely.  They’ve chosen to make an absolute gift of themselves to the church and the people who comprise the body of Christ.  Like the parishioners that Pope Francis serves, I tend to be demanding when I talk to them.  (As you may recall, I first met on of the Dominicans at an AAAS meeting and finagled my way into a book club).But it’s not only professed religious that “do not belong to themselves.”  That’s part and parcel of the vocation that belongs to every Christian — to be a saint.  Unfortunately, I recognize myself a lot more in the subsequent paragraph from Pope Francis:I would like to spend a moment trying to describe the anti-apostolic vice called apathy.  It is a failing that eats away at the apostolic perseverance required in our mission as pastors of God’s faithful people.  What characterizes every form of apathy is a sort of utopian vision that refuses to take seriously the times, the places, and the persons among whom we carry out our pastoral mission.  A philosopher might say that such a person seeks to exist outside space and time.I wouldn’t normally think of myself as apathetic, since I’m high energy and tend to fill up my schedule.  But I’m not always giving my energy and my joy to the task that is actually before me.  In Pope Francis’s description, apathy is the result of us absenting ourselves from our lives and our vocation.  That could be a consequence of just general listlessness or of turning our back on the world we actually live in in favor of an imagined one, where our responsibilities are more to our liking.For example, at some point in the last month, I was riding the metro and ran into a person I’ve met before on the platform.  I really didn’t want to talk to them, not because I have any particular antipathy, but because I was on my way back from the library and I preferred to read the novel I’d just picked up.  So, when we did start chatting, I was hardly “trembl[ing] with emotion, performing decisive gestures that become a foundation.”  I was just generically cheery, feeling all the time as though my time was being stolen from me.That possessiveness of my time and attention would be correct if I were living in a different world, where my primary purpose was, say, reading as much fantasy and science fiction as possible.  But I’m actually supposed to be Christ to others.  I’m not obligated to give up all of my “me” time — after all, I’m also one of the daughters of God I want to do right by — but when people offer me the chance to live out my vocation, I don’t want to view it as irrelevant or a distraction from other things that I’ve made into an idol.I think it would be fine to brush someone off by saying honestly, “Do you mind if I’m unsociable?  I’d love to chat a different time, but I’m really excited to read this and I just got it.”  In that case, I’m giving the other person the chance to do me a kindness and removing any barrier of deception or distance by making my need known.  I also could still talk to my friend, but with less of a spirit of resignation, and more recognition that I’ve been handed a gift of time, not had my time docked.Overall, I really like the framing of apathy as misapplied joy or perseverance.  That way, I have to check I’m doing the right thing well, not just doing the thing I’ve chosen well.
This week’s chapter was more difficult than those previous for me.  By the time I got up to this summary in the final pages, I was still at sea:In summary, then, we are confronted with two rival projects.  The first is the project of our faith that recognizes God as Father; this is the project that works for justice and makes us all brothers and sisters.  The other project is the one proposed to us by the enemy acting as an angel of light; it is the project of the absent God, where humans prey on humans and the law of the strongest prevails: homo homini lupus.  Which project will I choose?  Am I able to distinguish one from the other?  If I realize that I cannot discern between them, will I be astute enough to defend myself?Unlike the last chapter, where Pope Francis used more concrete examples from day-to-day life (think of the woman making the priest walk to her house to bless it), a lot of this chapter stayed abstract and academic to me.  Yes, we’re called to choose between God and the privation-thereof, check.  But we’re also not so good at doing that, check.  In order to read this chapter with more urgency, I kept reaching back to C.S. Lewis’s Screwtape Letters for examples of choices between desiring God and desiring the world that do sneak up on me.But, given the distance at which I was reading the chapter, I didn’t know what to do with this:When the enemy comes up against a faith that is by definition militant, he takes on the semblance of an angel of light and begins to sow seeds of pessimism.  To engage effectively in any struggle, one must be fully confident of victory.  Those who begin a struggle without robust confidence have already lost half the battle.  Christian victory always involves a cross, but a cross that is the banner of victory.Yes?  I mean, I am technically confident that prodigal sons will be welcomed back if they choose to return and that God gives us a lot of opportunities to ask for grace and healing, no matter how far we’ve wandered.  But that seems like confidence in the power of Christ to redeem us, not any particular confidence about which way I’m moving (world-wards or homewards) at the moment.  So, being confident that there’s a way back doesn’t quite cure my pessimism that I might still be blundering in the opposite direction.And I don’t find the comment about victory and the cross all that reassuring. As far as I understand, it means I shouldn’t assume that suffering is a cue that I’m on the wrong track, but it’s not exactly a polestar for the right path either.  So that comment curbs one error of moral navigation but still leaves me lost.Again, I’m reasoning a lot more about this chapter by pulling in outside sources.  Pope Francis is writing primarily to priests, so talking about “discerning” brings up a richer array of references than just “deciding” or “judging.”  I assume he’s referencing the Ignatian spirituality of his Jesuit order, which places an extraordinary emphasis on developing discernment (or, as an Aristotelian might put it, learning phronesis — practical wisdom).  And, if you want to learn more about that, with more concrete examples and worked problems, I recommend a book that one of you recommended to me: Weeds Among the Wheat: Discernment Where Prayer and Action Meet by Thomas H. Green, S.J.In my very abbreviated summary, discernment is the practice of sharpening your moral sense.  By reviewing your actions after they pass (perhaps in a Daily Examen) and being mindful and alert to them as they occur, you can become increasingly sensitive to which actions make you a vessel of God’s love and which spill the graces out unused.  Instead of only having a sense of how to choose when the options are stark, you are more able to recognize “the enemy acting as an angel of light” (as when you might want to speak sharply to someone who is underdressed for Mass — in the guise of reverence, you might be chasing someone away).  And you may grow to notice more choices available in day to day life.I can kind of see this theme resting below the text of this chapter, but, not being as steeped in discernment as I’d like, it’s a little too far away for me to grasp easily. UPDATE: Gilbert gives his reading of this chapter at The Last Conformer
Cardinal Bergoglio on the busI got stuck for a while on this chapter.  Partially because I was up north for a debate reunion (and suffering the side-effects of keeping undergraduate hours) and partially because Open Mind, Faithful Heart has turned out to be a bit more focused on the needs of priests than I expected.But, as I was reminded when two engaged friends of mine were joking about being the prior and prioress of the abbey of their family, all believers share in Christ’s office as priest, prophet, and king.  So I went through the chapter again, trying to sort out what still spoke to me in my role as a laywoman, and why.  Looking at one excerpt:Our mission then–the mission that frightens us and makes us offer excuses like the ones we hear from the lips of the reluctant prophets in the scriptures–is to evangelize, to shepherd the faithful people of God.  And that mission establishes us in our vocation.  In calling us to that mission, Jesus gives us solidarity in the depths of our hearts: he establishes us as pastors and makes that our identity.  In our visits to the sick, in our administration of the sacraments, in our teaching of the catechism, and in all the rest of our priestly activity, we are collaborating with Christ in establishing Christian hearts.  At the same time, and by the same means, that is, by the work we do, the Lord is establishing and rooting our hearts in his own.Nearly all of these (especially the offering of excuses) are things I can and should do.  I can evangelize or visit the sick or teach the catechism.  The notable exception is the administration of the sacraments.I find it interesting that the then-Cardinal doesn’t set the sacraments at the end of the list.  It would be natural for a list of priestly activities to build to the most important or most glorious, but, instead, the sacraments are tucked into the middle of the sequence.Sacraments aren’t the only times that priests scatter graces, but they are the only times we can be sure that we’ve come to the right place to seek out God.  That’s why sacraments are defined as the outward sign of an inward grace — the ritual and formality reassures us and gives us something to rely on.  Christ can come to us anywhere, but sacraments give us somewhere to go looking.But priests don’t stop asking for and passing along grace when they step down from the altar, and these quiet graces of good works and kindness are available to everyone.  I live in Washington D.C. which often feels rich with priests to me.  So, when a friend comes to me with a complex problem, theological or otherwise, I’m prone to ask them if they’d like me to throw a priest or a friar at them.  After all, their job is being helpful.I could stand to do more thinking about when I should throw me at the problems, or what problems never even rise to my attention, since I don’t make myself easy to approach or don’t go out into the world enough in order to spot them.  We’re all called to be channels of God’s grace, although few of us have clearly delineated spiritual responsibilities of priests. This is the seventh day of our Novena to St. Dymphna. You can find the prayers here and a little background on why we’re praying it here.
At the beginning of the chapter “Nurtured by the Church” Cardinal Bergoglio draws out parallels between the Church and Mary, the Mother of God.Mary brings us forth and cares for us, and the Church does also.  Mary helps us grom, and the Church does also.  And at the hour of death, the priest bids us farewell in the name of the Church and leaves us in the arms of Mary.  She is “a woman clothed with the sun, with the moon under her feet, and on her head a crown of twelve stars” (Apoc 12:1).  That is the Church and that is the modest Virgin that our faithful people venerate.  That is why in speaking of the Church we need to feel the same devotion as we feel for the Virgin Mary.I love this kind of approach to teaching, theological or otherwise.  By contrasting two ideas, I often find that I learn them both better, since looking for similarities and differences makes my understanding of each more concrete.  I like sometimes, to pose myself the question of “What would happen if I treated Friend X the way I treat Friend Y?” and think about whether I’m ill-serving one or both of them, or if there’s a joy I could be sharing that I’m currently neglecting.  Contrasting loves and affections helps me deepen them, since it gets me out of ruts and complacencies.One of the prayers I make a lot is to share in Mary’s love for whichever particular person I’m currently having a difficult time with.  I know this person is loved; I’m just missing out on that sensibility at the moment.  Starting from the certainty that there is a love I could share in helps my try to find my way toward the sentiment.  And, if I’m still stuck, I can think about the love that Mary has for me, or that I have for her, or even the one I’d like to have for her and see if there’s any part of it I can extend to mend my poor relationship with the person I currently dislike or feel indifferent toward.Thus, I really liked one passage at the end of this chapter, where Cardinal Bergoglio is illustrating what our love for the Church should look like:We’ve already talked about the responsibility we have to be sons and daughters of the Church and at the same time to create Church.  Our love for the Church should lead us to make manifest to the world her holiness, her loving fruitfulness, and her discipline, all of which flow from her being totally Christ’s.What he writes about the Church can again be translated back to how we love Mary, and I want to do more to translate it to how I love (or, aspire to love) other people.When I interact with others, there’s plenty I don’t love, at first blush, but, since everyone I meet is called to the vocation of sainthood, there’s always holiness and grace present.  If I can’t spot it, it’s a defect in my sight, not in the person I’m looking at.  So, it should always be possible for me to rejoice in and make manifest to the world someone else’s holiness and love.  The parts that I can’t recognize and embrace aren’t necessarily my concern.  But there’s always a thread, if not a torrent of fruitful love that I can see and celebrate.To be honest, I usually start out much more reserved/indifferent to acquaintances than average, so it tends to be a pleasant surprise when I actually get to know someone well enough to the point where there’s something I actively treasure about them, that I’m eager to share with others.  The plodding progress towards that joy is on my end; the source is on theirs. 
An icon of the prophet ElijahWhen Pope Francis described the experiences of the prophets, an inheritance to which we are called, I didn’t recognize myself in this description of their plight.These experiences of our ancestors in the faith should encourage us greatly.  When we realize we are chosen, we feel that the weight on us is too great, and we experience fear–in some cases even panic.  That is the beginning of the cross.  At the same time, we feel deeply drawn by the Lord who by his very summons seduces us to follow him with a fire burning in our heart (cf. Jer 20:7-18).  These two feelings are joined together because since the days of the patriarchs they have prefigured the abandonment that Christ felt on the cross as he fulfilled the Father’s will to the very end.  The mission places us perforce upon the wood of the cross, for the cross is the sign that the mission has been received by the Spirit of God and not according the flesh.Prophets feel they are far from God when they are overextended in His service, and they turn to Him for help, but are left waiting for a reply.  I almost never feel this kind of abandonment, because I tend to abandon first.  When I’m in trouble, I tend to emulate what Colonel Graff wanted for Ender:Graff: “He can never come to believe that anybody will ever help him out, ever.  If he once thinks there’s an easy way out, he’s wrecked.”Anderson: “You’re right.  That would be terrible, if he believed he had a friend.”Graff: “He can have friends.  It’s parents he can’t have.”Call it pride or responsibility or learning the wrong lessons from group projects at school (“If you can’t make your partners behave, Leah, you’ll have to work alone”) or a very steady diet of fantasy and science fiction growing up, but I’m very reluctant to make plans that depend on someone else.  And, when I do, I like to avoid the imposition of an open-ended ask, but instead offer a precis of what I need, how I’ve limited the ask, and how very all right it will be if the other person is unavailable.This is all useful, to a point.  My plans have fewer points of failure than most people I know and I think I’m less prone than the median person to “trying to try.”  But I miss more chances to invite other people into my difficulties and use snags as an opportunity for intimacy.  And that’s particularly important in a relationship with God.  Feeling neglected by God presupposes trust in and dependence on him, so shaking your fist at the heavens might represent more of a connection than knuckling down to sort things out yourself.You can’t fear that your prayers aren’t being answered if you never actually imitate Christ and call “Abba, Abba.“
In this week’s chapter of Pope Francis’s book, he quotes a letter by St. Ignatius of Loyola that seemed particularly appropriate for Lent:Experiencing difficulty is nothing exceptional; rather it is what ordinarily happens in matters of much importance for the divine service and glory… The contradictions we saw before and those we see now are nothing new for us; in view of our experience in other places, the hope we have that Christ our Lord will be well served in this city are all the greater because of the obstacles put in our way by those who are always attempting to obstruct the service of God.  For the enemy moves people who have good intentions but bad information to reject that which they do not understand.Whether your self-imposed penance turns out to be harder than you thought, or the people around you all seem to have the intention of helping you have a very, shall we say, fruitful season of purification, Ignatius and Pope Francis remind us not to be too shocked when this comes to pass.It can make a big difference expecting a pain instead of being blindsided by it.  The warning that Ignatius gives helps us experience the strain of Lent and repentance in something of the spirit that a runner experiences sore muscles.  The pain isn’t a sign of danger, but of growth.  When the little dashboard light of “pain/fear/exhaustion” goes off, it helps to be able to say, “Oh yeah, I expected that, and it’s ok.”But, in this passage, St. Ignatius doesn’t desire strain for its own sake.  It’s good to be purified by struggle, but we shouldn’t have a lust to encounter resistance, whether in ourselves or in others, so we can have the pleasure of overcoming it.  I’ve fallen into this trap before, where my honest, first reaction to someone’s brusqueness or cruelty is delight that I get to be nice in a challenging situation.  In those cases, the resistance I should be worried about addressing isn’t the other person’s behavior but my own triumphalism, and the way it’s blinding me to desiring the good of my interlocutor.For the Orthodox, Lent began this Monday, and I enjoyed Rod Dreher’s reflections on the beginning of the season and its similarity toward what the Sufis call “inner jihad:”Lent is not a payback for our sins, or an attempt to win merit. That would be futile. Rather, Lent is a time of mourning, of repentance, of disciplining our tendencies toward sin… Lent is a long trek across the desert of the self, fighting with every step. If done right, though, the victories bring cleansing joy, as Forese said.And from one other post, kicking off his Lenten Purgatorio book club:But then, they were in Hell in this mortal life, because they chose to dwell in their sin so fully that they didn’t even recognize it as sin. This is us. The Pilgrim doesn’t walk through Hell gawking at other sinners, and thanking God that he is not like them. He walks through Hell and comes to understand that he is, in fact, like them. He knows many of these damned souls personally. They aren’t strangers to him. Neither is sin.The walk through the Inferno is meant to compel the reader to recognize his sins, and to turn from them. Purgatorio is for those who have repented from their sins, and who will be granted Paradise by the grace of God, but who need to be purified of their sinful inclinations before being strong enough to bear the intensity of God’s purity. This is important to keep in mind as we prepare for the journey up the seven-storey mountain. Purgatory is not a punishment for sins, any more than Lent is a punishment for sins. Rather, it is a time to perfect our repentance by subjecting all our passions to the will of God, and having them burned away.These meditations, coupled with the excerpt from St. Ignatius, help me get a handle on what Pope Francis might intend us to pray for when he advises us: “Let us ask the Lord on this day for the grace to appreciate fully the militant aspect of our apostolic loves.”Being happy warrior against inward or outward resistance doesn’t necessitate being hateful or scornful to what or whom obstructs us.  In fact, it’s easier to fight with joy instead of need or fear if we’re fighting to heal the wounds in the world, and conquer resistance by bringing all things to unity in Christ.  Whatever we encounter (and especially whomever) is still made by and beloved of God, so we hope for it to be baptized and reconciled, not destroyed. DarwinCatholic is praying a novena for Ordering Lives Wisely by St. Thomas Aquinas, that ends today on Ash Wednesday.  If you’d like to join her and me, you can find the prayers here.
In 2014, I’m reading and blogging through Pope Francis/Cardinal Bergoglio’s Open Mind, Faithful Heart: Reflections on Following Jesus.  Every Monday, I’ll be writing about the next meditation in the book, so you’re welcome to peruse them all and/or read along.This week’s chapter of Pope Francis’s Open Mind, Faithful Heart: Reflections on Following Jesus ends with two questions to consider in prayer and reflection:Do we pray to God for the grace of conversion?At what times in our lives have we preferred the darkness to the light?My first thought, on reaching the end of the chapter, was, “Well, no one can notice that easily when they prefer the darkness to the light, or they wouldn’t prefer it in the first place.”  But I hadn’t quite finished verbalizing the thought before several examples from my own life obligingly popped into my head to contradict me.  It’s seldom that I feel like I’m deliberately choosing the darkness, but I am aware of not accepting or embracing the light.When I choose against the light, it usually doesn’t feel like I’m picking darkness, but security or simplicity.  There’s an attraction in having everything settled, even if it’s being settled for the worse (“I can’t count on anyone” “People just don’t like me” “I’ll never get along with her” etc).  I sometimes prefer to circumscribe my relationships and my options, even if I might accidentally be throwing out a positive outcome.In everyday life, I like to get things settled quickly, so there’s no lingering worry or nagging task.  Instead of trying to remember to take out the recycling, I should put it in a bag and in front of the door now.  If I need to reply to an email, I should write the response immediately, even if I might actually send it later.But, in order to be a better person, I have to be a little comfortable being unsettled and in progress.  Chores and tasks I can finish cleanly, but almost no relationships can or should be that briskly mananged.There’s a tendency for religious people who don’t know many atheists to straw man them by saying atheists must hate God, or be making a choice to reject Him.  But most atheists don’t have such strong feelings about a being they don’t believe in, any more than they would actively deny yetis.If you want to look for a way God can be squeezed out of a life, you don’t need to look for the people verbally denying him, but for the lapses in the lives of people like me (Christian or not) who bundle away opportunities for grace as untidy, and succumb too often to the desire to have life be small enough to fit within the limits of my strength or knowledge, instead of wanting to grow to fit the wide world, instead.
I found it interesting that, in this week’s chapter, Pope Francis links impatience and hopelessness.  It might be that I’m biased, since impatience is one of my besetting sins, but, at first blush, the two emotions seem opposed.  Impatience presupposes a desire; we want the desired object to arrive here faster, but hopelessness desires nothing, or, if it does, can’t see how that desire could be satisfied.  But Pope Francis writes:In attempting to skip over stages of growth, the impatient heart ceases to be a creature; it becomes instead a creator of shallow projects of protest that are inherently self-seeking.  The eventual punishment of the Israelites is inevitable because impatience brings with it the built-in punishment of sterility.  Because they want everything at once, the impatient are left with nothing.  Their projects are like so many seeds that fall on rocky soil: their roots have no depth, their words lack consistency.  Impatience and hopelessness can deform the project of a people; they can distort the image of the Father who calls us to be a people; they can undermine our maturity, our ability to struggle, our apostolic stamina; they can turn us into gossiping busybodies.  In seeking to obviate time, impatience and hopelessness tempt us to trust in the illusion of magic as a way of controlling or manipulating God.I suppose that both impatience and hopelessness have a character of shirking whatever task or moment is before me.  If I’ve already put all appropriate effort into a project, additional worry or yearning is energy robbed from something else I should be doing.  It is this spendthrift expenditure of my efforts that leads to seeds being scattered, untended, to die.The hopeless neglect their work and loves because they believe their work is not useful.  The impatient, like me, neglect some of our work, because we love our labor too much.  We can end up watching a pot, waiting for it to boil, as though it were our desire that was heating it, instead of the stove.  There’s a reluctance to step back and yield the element of the work that isn’t under our control.For me, this impulse is tangled up in pride, and my sometimes-desire for simplicity over goodness.  When I focus on a task out of impatience, and overtend it while neglecting other work, I don’t have to be afraid that I haven’t put enough effort into it.  I’ve gone a bit further, just to be safe.  And I’ve screened off the possibility of getting outside help, so I don’t have the trouble of apportioning credit afterwards.Just like the hopeless, my actions betray a certain carelessness about the usefulness of my own work.  It may feel like I am treating my involvement as critical, but, if I can afford to waste it on a task as low-yield as rumination or frustration, I must not have acknowledged any better purpose that work could be put to.  (If nothing else, I could be reading or baking bread).
Today is the Feast of the Annunciation, the solemnity in which the Church celebrates Mary’s “Amen” and consent to be part of God’s plan for salvation.  But, in our day-to-day lives, we seldom have moments that feel like such obvious invitations to cooperate with grace, and even the ones we do encounter are hardly heralded by the appearance of the Angel Gabriel.  But, as Pope Francis points out in this week’s chapter of Open Mind, Faithful Heart, moments of temptation (which seem a lot more common, at least in my life) are also opportunities for grace.  He writes:However [the Devil] attacks, he is always astute in his planning.  He knows what he wants.  And if he attacks something, it is because he recognizes that it is dangerous.  That is why Christian tradition asserts that where there is temptation there is also grace.  Temptation is a “difficult time,” Cardinal Pironio tells us, and as such “it belongs to the designs of the Father, being essentially a time of grace and salvation.”So, when I feel my anger or impatience flare, I’m not necessarily far from God.  I’m holding something very precious in my hands, my love and charity, and I have to decide whether to keep it fast or let it go.  Each moment of temptation is a chance to turn back to God, and even to be reminded of what He is.The apophatic strain of theology (also known as via negativa) defines God by what He is not.  He is not finite, changeable, etc.  We may not have a very good grasp on what it really means to be outside of time, but we know what it’s like to be within time, from our own experience, and we know that God is somehow different.So, in a moment of temptation, I’m being reminded of what God is not and what I am actually allowed to leave behind, if I choose to.  My contempt, my callousness isn’t my proper inheritance, they’re poisoned gifts that I accepted in error, that I’m free to relinquish at any moment.I might not know exactly what I need to do to put on Christ, but every small, daily temptation is a chance to learn.  By saying “No” to each of them (or as many as I can manage), I can grow close enough to God to start recognizing what I could be saying “Amen” to in their stead.  What can I do with the time freed up by giving up Threes/2048?  If I put aside anger toward an acquaintance, what feeling could blossom in its stead?While I’m still mired in “the night that covers me / Black as the Pit from pole to pole” I don’t have the perspective to see or desire the graces that Mary said “Amen” to, but, by struggling my way out by a series of small “No”s, I may be able to say yes.  Till them, like Puddleglum from C.S. Lewis’s The Silver Chair, I will keep turning away from shadows even when I can’t quite see light:Suppose we have only dreamed, or made up, all those things-trees and grass and sun and moon and stars and Aslan himself. Suppose we have. Then all I can say is that, in that case, the made-up things seem a good deal more important than the real ones. Suppose this black pit of a kingdom of yours is the only world. Well, it strikes me as a pretty poor one. And that’s a funny thing, when you come to think of it. We’re just babies making up a game, if you’re right. But four babies playing a game can make a play-world which licks your real world hollow. That’s why I’m going to stand by the play world. I’m on Aslan’s side even if there isn’t any Aslan to lead it. I’m going to live as like a Narnian as I can even if there isn’t any Narnia.When I can’t quite grasp the idea of God, or am mired in despair, I know Him by his difference from the way that I’m wicked or wounded.  At the most basic, in a moment of temptation, the answer to “What is God?” is “Not this!”  And that “No” denies the great lie, that weakness and wickedness is the best we can hope for.  Actual strength may be beyond me, but the desire for strength is within my grasp.  The more I hold on to that desire, the more alert and better prepared I’ll be to accept strength, if it’s offered.
In this week’s reading, Pope Francis discusses a prideful kind of hope, that redirects and tarnishes our natural desire to serve:We are permeated with vanities of every sort, but the most common type of vainglory among us is defeatism.  Vainglorious is the person who prefers to be the general of defeated armies rather than a simple soldier in a squadron that continues to fight on even when it has been devastated.  How often we dream of expansionist apostolic plans that are really those of defeated generals  Curiously, in such cases, we deny the history of our Church, which is glorious precisely because it is a history of sacrifices, of hopes, of daily struggles.This passage spoke to a certain kind of vainglory I’ve indulged in my heart more times than I care to admit.  When I am in the midst of conflict with other people, I like to imagine being nice to them and being rebuffed, so I feel like the bigger person, especially good since my goodness wasn’t recognized or valued.  But this does cast me as the defeated general.  When I sally forth, my goal is not just to do the right thing for myself, but to heal the wound between myself and my antagonist, so we can both love each other as we ought.  If I walk away, having technically performed charitable acts, but without reconciliation or even the desire for it, I’ve gained nothing for either of us in the battle.I see this error repeated in the Church, at least in America, where there seems to be a positive delight, in some quarters, at being turned back.  No one should really be quoting Cardinal Francis George’s prediction “I expect to die in bed, my successor will die in prison and his successor will die a martyr in the public square” with relish.  Being willing to suffer humiliation or persecution for the sake of Christ is different from desiring that these miseries be visited upon you.If you want to experience some kind of redemptive suffering, walk in the wind without a muffler.  The wind isn’t harmed by causing you harm.  But persecution requires a persecutor, and Christians should never hope to see their fellow brothers and sisters in Christ cast in that role.  Even if it would make us feel really cool and badass for resisting.When we’re engaged in a fight for a good cause, it’s natural to expect pain, or even feel discomfited if it isn’t present.  After all, in physical exertions, a reasonable amount of pain and discomfort is the signal that you’re actually exerting yourself.  But, just as it would do no good for your muscles to slam your hand in a door, even if it really hurt, there are a lot of ways to suffer that do nothing for us and for our enemies–or rather, estranged friends.Sometimes, the thing that’s required in the fight is a very small, foot-soldier kind of service, that doesn’t make us feel important or impressive, or that our full strength was required.  I have to remember that the pain of humility is also a signal that I’m putting in effort, and strengthening my moral fibers.  It’s not as exciting sounding as showy, self-focused acts of put-upon charity, but it’s the service that’s required and the strength that I need.
This week, I was particularly struck by one paragraph in this week’s selection from Open Mind, Faithful Heart, where Pope Francis traces out a relationship between memory and intellect:The reason for this is that memory has the power to unite and integrate.  Just as intellect, given over to its own forces, partitions reality, so memory becomes the vital unifying force of a family or a people.  A family without memory hardly deserves to be called such.  A family that doesn’t respect and care for its grandparents, who are its living memory, is a family in disintegration, but the families and the peoples that remember their past are families and peoples with a future.The partitioning inquiries of intellect aren’t being denigrated in this passage, but Pope Francis is drawing our attention to what we leave undone, if we sink entirely into our studies.  Plunging into inquiry alone is like reaping a field, but neglecting to carry the crops home.  When we seek the truth, we need to know it in order to be of use to someone else, or in order to know and love the world better.  Mere knowledge, that isn’t touched by love of another or for the beauty of the thing we’ve found is sterile.Memory is what makes knowing fruitful, by passing discoveries from hand to hand, receiving old wisdom in exchange for our new ideas, and letting both temper the other.  In order to pass something from our head into others’, we need to understand our discoveries well enough to teach them.  We must know our audience well enough to bridge inferential gaps.  We need to know their loves well enough to represent the beauty of the fact or story we want to pass on.  And we have to know both the applications of our new idea and the needs of our audience well enough to decide whom we should offer this new part of the world to.Transmuting knowledge into memory requires us to bind up our love of this new datum with our loves for the people we are telling.  And, unlike intellect, which isn’t a pursuit that is attractive or available to everyone, memory is a kind of learning that everyone can participate in.  Tradition must be communal, so everyone has a part to play in enacting, teaching, or inquiring into the old stories.  Even children, who have very few stories of their own, as of yet, draw memory out of others, like little yelping birds, squalling to be fed.  The questions the audience asks tutors the storyteller in the way the hearers are thinking.This unitive power is particularly important when we are learning and teaching theology.  Science may not have a telos, but theology does — it’s meant to help us know God better so we can all be united together with Him.  Learning our fellow pilgrims as we learn Church history or metaphysics is a necessary part of the project.
Pope Francis narrates the presentation of Christ at the temple, and the prophesies and joy of Simeon and Anna.  And then he says:There is radiance in the temple because the Light is entering into it: “a light for revelation to the Gentiles and for glory to your people Israel” (Luke 2:32).  It is Candlemas day, the day of the candles that will become the paschal candle on the night of Passover and a dazzling sun at the end of history.  A hymn for the feast of the Epiphany tells us that the Magi are the just ones “who seek the Light with the help of the light”: lumen requirunt lumine.  Today in the temple, the final epiphany is foreshadowed.All these citations reminded me of a line from Psalm 36, which sometimes turns up in Divine Office: “For with you is the fountain of life; in your light we see light.”  In order to see it more clearly, Pope Francis moves from a discussion of Epiphany to a discussion of the Ignatian Spiritual Exercises, a way of preparing yourself to see and seek more clearly.I’ve just finished reading Jen Fulwiler’s memoir, Something Other than God, and, as she stumbles through the spiritual exercises she creates for herself as an agnostic, there’s a C.S. Lewis quote she keeps returning to:He shows much more of Himself to some people than to others—not because He has favourites, but because it is impossible for Him to show Himself to a man whose whole mind and character are in the wrong condition. Just as sunlight, though it has no favourites, cannot be reflected in a dusty mirror as clearly as in a clean one.You can put this another way by saying that while in other sciences the instruments you use are things external to yourself (things like microscopes and telescopes), the instrument through which you see God is your whole self. And if a man’s self is not kept clean and bright, his glimpse of God will be blurred—like the Moon seen through a dirty telescope.Simeon and Anna had been long polishing their mirrors with prayer and service, so, when the Christ-child came before them, they were able to be dazzled by His light, reflected in their souls.  One way to cultivate that brightness in ourselves is just to tackle individual blemishes as we find them.For instance, I am terrible about saying, “You’re welcome” when people thank me for something.  I tend to brush thanks off with a “Don’t be silly” or “No, no, it’s hardly altruistic for me to come to your concert, your singing was lovely!”  I don’t like debt, and I assume (probably falsely) that having to thank me for things makes the other person feel uncomfortable, so I try to dispel their gratitude instead of acknowledging it.This is almost certainly not the worst thing I do on a day to day basis, but it is one of the faults I’ve noticed, so I ought to address it, if only to have the habit of promptly pulling out my dustrag whenever I notice a spiritual smear.  But another way to notice the dust, in order to clear it away, is to do things that require more light.Perhaps my dustiness isn’t a problem is day to day life, but, if I try to use my mirror to spy out something lovely, but fainter, like God in lectio divina or the proper way to be kind to a friend in distress, I might become aware of the blurriness and insufficiency of my instrument, now that I’m asking more of it.In order to discover the imperfections, I need to move beyond by current comfort zone and habitual kludges to see what I’m actually working with, and where my caritas needs to be better developed.
In this week’s chapter of Open Mind, Faithful Heart, Pope Francis is discussing the promise of Christ’s return and the good fruits of its uncertain timing.  Let’s recap that part of Christian thinking briefly using Handel’s Messiah:While we are waiting, Pope Francis exhorts us to a committed kind of vigilance, a watchfulness that is not simply dutiful or anxious, but suffused with longing.  I thought of Hobbes lying in wait, tensed and happy, behind the door to leap out at Calvin when he returns home.  My little brother used to do the same thing–except he started his run from the back of the house, and got up to a very painful speed–because he was so happy to have me home from kindergarten.However, the Pope chose to illustrate his point with some slightly more Biblical images:There is a special kind of vigilance that is more than just paying close attention: it is vigilance that anticipates.  In the scriptures we read that among God’s faithful people, there were many just men and devout women who hoped with great longing.  There was John the Baptist, who sent to ask Jesus if he was the one they were hoping for (Matt 11:2-3), and there was Joseph of Arimathea, who was keenly awaiting the kingdom (Mark 15:23)… We would do well to ask ourselves whether our own vigilance has this same element of impatient hopefulness… This attitude of expectation has the virtue of hastening the coming of God’s kingdom, for, as Saint Peter tells us, we ought to be “waiting for and hastening the coming of the day of God.”But it’s easy to imagine that everyone is perhaps a little quick to jump the gun and discern the Lord.  The pareidolia that spots Jesus in a burned piece of toast is often parodied.  So, what’s wrong with that kind of watchfulness?  I might guess that one of the problems is that, for most people, it’s sterile.  Playing “Where’s Waldo” with images of God might be exciting, but it’s probably not convicting — it doesn’t “make all things new.”One kind of watchfulness I’ve found more fruitful is just looking for signs of “dressing up as Christ” from friends, coworkers, acquaintances, etc.  This kind of Christ-watching does require vigilance, since many kindnesses are small and fleeting.  Unless I’m actively watching, I may not notice a concerned look, a thoughtful question, a quick movement to remove an obstruction.  And, when I’m not being vigilant, my resting levels of perceptiveness aren’t very trustworthy.Vigilantly watching for Christ in others helps teach me to better imitate Him myself.  It helps me better love the people I encounter, since it corrects for my natural, defensive biases.  And, more than anything, it helps me see the world a bit more accurately, as dappled with grace and promise, and whets my desire to reflect that light back to the next watcher.The beacons are lit!
I’m pulling out a longer quote from Open Mind, Faithful Heart this week because I at least should probably hang this one over my bed or something.In our sinful human heart, as well as in our mysterious clinging to the realm that Paul calls “the law” (cf. Rom 7:13), there exists a secret sector that we guard with special zeal.  It is our hidden shame; it is the wound with which we torture ourselves; it is the fear that makes us adhere to law’s domain; it is our attachment to death as a way to ward off the life that threatens us; it is so many other things.  Each of us knows where in our hearts that zone is located, and often we find ourselves seeking refuge there.  We see that space as our private domain, and we believe that only we need see it.  Nevertheless, the vision we have of our inner heart is tenuous and myopic.  Only the brightness of Jesus’ judgment can provide the light we need to correct the distortions of our vision and judgement… We are blind and by ourselves we are incapable of envisioning salvation.  By holding on to our impotence, we try to keep hidden that shadowy sector of our hearts; not wanting to be saved, we end up becoming ever blinder until our hearts are hopelessly hardened.When I was in fifth grade or so, kids tended to bully me a little on the bus, and I didn’t tell anyone.  I reasoned that, currently, their behavior was only making me sad, but, that if I told someone else, like a parent or a teacher or a friend, that new person would also be sad, but probably wouldn’t be able to do anything about it.  So, as I saw it, the chance to fix the problem wasn’t on the table.  My only choices were to make other people unhappy or to keep the inconvenience private and, in my own way, put limits on the bullies’ power to harm anyone by limiting their effects to me, alone.I’m not sure, in that specific circumstance, that I was wrong, but I certainly, by default, tend to hold my cards a little too close to the chest.  I don’t like upsetting other people, especially because it means I suddenly have two problems: my original one, and the new problem of cheering up the friend who is more upset that the situation warrants.  After all, most of the people around me aren’t (recovering) Stoics, so, if I tell them something bad happened to be or that I’m having a strained relationship with a friend or that I’ve hurt someone, they tend to have a strong, emotional reaction at the injustice of it all.In contrast, I’m quick to try to figure out what practical action I can take, and, if none is available, to treat the problem as though it were as implacable and natural as a sudden downpour when I’m without an umbrella.  I’m going to get wet; I can only decide whether or not to be grumpy about it.But my friends have something right, when it doesn’t occur to them to become placidly resigned to the world.  Some injustices may be outside my locus of control, but, if I treat them as statically unresolvable, I’m acting like Javert again.  Javert makes the world small, a place of law, not mercy, because he knows how to live up to the law.  I can harden my heart by only longing for the things I can control and achieve by my own efforts.  If I treat everything I don’t know how to fix and unfixable, I’m lowering my eyes from the beatific vision, and losing sight of the star that should be guiding me.It can feel practical to just stop minding the things I can’t address, but I need to remain sensitive, so I can be open to new graces and opportunities to change.  Instead of just accepting the little shadowy parts of myself and trying to figure out how to work around them, I have to expose them to light, so they can be healed, instead of compensated for. Bonus: Reportedly, the musical First Date wasn’t very good, but this song is pretty good, well performed, and on point for this post.
In this week’s selection from Open Mind, Faithful Heart, Pope Francis talks about how we can discern God’s will for us in the great sweeps of history and the small, internal movements of our own hearts:As I said before, if we want our lives to become part of God’s manifestation, they must be inserted into human history.  What is more, they must be reinterpreted in light of the great events of this history… If we were to understand our own lives or the life of the institution to which we belong outside this perspective, then we would be expressing merely human attitudes.  Our judgements would be based on worldly criteria, which inevitably fall outside the shadow of the mystery of the cross.  In the Gospel narratives of Jesus’ birth, we find him revealing himself to the simple folk, the shepherds, the humble sages (the Magi), The preferences of God do not incline toward social elites or the worldly wise, but only toward the lowly, simple folk who insert themselves into history as servants of the only “Servant,” the one who gives meaning to the whole of our journey.Saint Ignatius, at the end of the Spiritual Exercises, proposes that we “call back into our memory the gifts we have received–creation, redemption, and other particular gifts–so as to ponder with deep affection how much God has done for us… Doing this means searching out in our own lives the traces of God, the God.The part I found most striking about this passage is that, when Pope Francis talks about history, he clearly does not mean only the people who wind up in the history books.  The complaint of Mrs. Lintott, from The History Boys would not be foreign to him (“History is a commentary on the various and continuing incapabilities of men. What is history? History is women following behind with the bucket.”).When we look at what the world records, it is a litany of our insufficiencies and attempts to manage them, with a great deal of the work being done by people whose names are not recorded.  There’s no reason we need to become one of the people whose names get written down in order to be inserted into human history, and yet a desire for higher stakes seems to crop up sometimes in Catholicism (to wit, the oft-cited line from Cardinal Francis George: “I expect to die in bed, my successor will die in prison and his successor will die a martyr in the public square”).Such a life would certainly rate mention in the worldly history books, but that recognition ought to be irrelevant to a Christian trying to live righteously.  There’s enough tumult and strife in one heart, or one community to satisfy a hundred Don Quixote’s longing for noble battle. 
In this week’s chapter, Pope Francis talked about evangelization being more than simple explanation of the Gospel:Whatever form it takes, our task as bearers of the epiphany always goes beyond the simple acts of transmitting a message, relating a verifiable history, or proving some truth.  When fully accepted, the epiphany of God becomes flesh in the life of the disciple in such a way that it can be transmitted only from this “incarnation.”  That is to say, it can be transmitted to others not by words of flesh and blood, not by human wisdom, but only by the scandalous inevitability of the cross; it can be transmitted only by martyrion, by bearing witness…As disciples, we replicate in some way the very mystery of Christ’s epiphany.  By bearing witness, we produce light that provokes joy, and from the joy flows glory.  This is the essence of bearing testimony: stirring praise and adoration of the Father through the joy that invades the hearts of those who see and hear the message.This weekend, I wound up at a bookclub run by some Orthodox Christian friends of mine to discuss Karl Marx’s “On The Jewish Question,” and our conversation naturally drifted to what, if any, role the Christian should play qua Christian in politics and civic life.  The priests in Ukraine who interposed themselves between soldiers and revolutionaries seemed to offer one good answer, as well as an illustration of the kind of martyrion that Pope Francis endorses.By walking into the no-man’s land between the two sides, the priests are offering the combatants something to look at that is not an enemy.  Technically, the people on the opposing side are also not our enemies, but our (possibly misguided/dangerous) neighbors, but the priests are probably easier to recognize as brothers in the moment.  By walking out into the firing solution, they telling the fighters that they would rather endanger their bodies than see the people on either side endanger their souls.They’re separating the two sides in a different way than a wall would.  They walked into the field wearing icons, holding crucifixes, and wearing vestments.  It’s impossible to look at them without being reminded that the world is larger than the square where the battle is taking place.  There is noting utilitarian or matter-of-fact about the beautiful things they are holding and wearing; the vestments themselves are a rebuke that reminds the forces arrayed across the square that it is better to lift up an icon than a rifle.These men are a witness to joy.
I’m non-metaphorically feverish, so my thoughts on this week’s chapter from Pope Francis’s book will be brief.  Here’s the quote I was most struck by in this week’s reading:When Jesus Christ is present, the true light shines and all shadows disappear (1 John 2:8).  But then begins the drama of the rejection of the light.  This light, which brings the law and the prophets to fulfillment, is spurned, because its luminosity is different from what was expected; its brilliance illumines places other than those imagined; it provokes opposition as challenging as it is perplexing.In many of the stories and parables of the Bible, there’s a danger in looking too far beyond our daily needs and tasks.  There’s nothing wrong with curiosity and theorizing, but, if we push too far past what we know, we have to hold on lightly to the ideas we build, so that we don’t become Fred Hoyles–clinging to his theory of the Steady State universe long after it had been disproven.If you’ve ever done an experiment and been angry at your data as it came in and started looking noisier, then you’ve experienced the kind of perplexing challenge that Pope Francis is describing.  Although you started by trying to discover something true, the truth isn;t welcome by the time it shows up.This kind of reaction can be triggered even by truths that are obviously welcome news, from an outside perspective.  If you lose your wallet, panic or yell at someone, and then the wallet is found, your previous distress no longer feels justified, so it almost feels more desirable to be seriously inconvenienced in order to have a consistent narrative of the experience.  (Same goes for not wanting to resolve a fight and re-recognize your opponent as a person again).Christ comes and upends the old order and the old expectations.  He doesn’t contradict the world we’ve known so far, but, as a friend of mine recently said about mathematics, “[He makes] simple things complex so that complex things become simple.”
In this week’s chapter of Open Mind, Faithful Heart, Pope Francis braids together three moments in Christ’s ministry: his discoverty by the Magi, his baptism, and the wedding at Cana.  As Francis tells it, these stories are all about Christ inviting us forward to find Him, be healed by Him, and wholly united to Him, as spouses are to each other.Falling right after the Ascension, when Jesus leaves his disciples for the last time, the thing that struck me most about this passage wasn’t just Francis’s discussion of the Church (and its people) as bride, but as widow.  Because Christ leaves after the wedding, the Church is left to keep the faith and to honor its marriage alone.The loneliness isn’t indefinite.  But in each moment it occurs (the span between the Ascension and Penetcost, between the Crucifixion and the Resurrection, between sinning and Confession) we do exist as widows.  As a result, Pope Francis says, adultery against an earthly spouse is an even more serious business than just a betrayal of your beloved.Because adultery symbolizes idolatry, it is seen as an offence against God’s union with his people and against Christ’s union with his Church (Hosea 1-3; Jer 3:3-9; Ezekiel 16; Isa 50:1).  The fleeting delight of our private celebrations and the fascination of our personal plans of salvation end up devoid of eschatological joy, they are evidence of widowhood without hope, without children, without a spouse who will return–an utterly sterile state (Jer 7:34; 16:9; Apoc 18:23).Pope Francis is fairly grim when he talks about the temptations toward adultery and its consequences, but I still found the chapter fairly cheering.  For one thing, the nice thing about being in danger of adultery is that it means you have a bond that is powerful enough to be able to be profaned.  (You can’t betray a colleague in the same way you can a spouse).For another, it suggests that we are all strengthened by honoring marriages, even if we don’t participate in them ourselves.  If the marital dynamic is an essential part of my relationship with Christ, then I can strengthen it by being a guest at the wedding feast, even if I’m not the bride or by providing aid to the widow and the orphan, even if I am childless and have no earthy husband to be widowed by. Today is the seventh day of my Novena to Mary, Undoer of Knots, and you’re welcome to join in. 
The title of this week’s chapter is “Faith Beyond Space and Time,” and it’s mainly about bewilderment.  Because God is transcendent, we usually go slightly wrong in our discussions and questions, but we can be confused in an appropriate or inappropriate way.  In the chapter, Pope Francis writes:We should not confuse bewilderment with the doubt provoked by the devilish curiosity that seeks to know the identity of Jesus in order to take measures against him… It is also the tactic used by those who try to trap him with difficult questions about paying tribute to Caesar or punishing an adulterous woman or marriage arrangements in heaven… Our honest perplexity always remains open to God’s salvation, but our idle curiosity does not.Reading through his examples and exegesis, I was struck by another distinction.  In the examples that Pope Francis cites as “devilish curiosity” people tend to be asking Christ questions they don’t really want to know the answer to.  The man who asks about repeated marriage and heaven is not necessarily in his second marriage — he won’t behave differently depending on the answer he receives — he just wants to ask a “hard” question to reveal Christ to be as bewildered as his interlocutor.In contrast, the young man who has faithfully followed the commandments and wants to know what else is needed is also asking a “hard” question, but he’s asking so that he can learn and make a choice.  The question has personal stakes.  Once he hears the answer, he has the chance to test it by living it, in which case he will come to know Christ better by the fruits of his advice.In contrast, the people asking about serial marriage will not put what they hear through the test of action and are more likely to wind up ruminating — turning the question over and over as a hypothetical without bringing it into contact with lived experience that could offer a correction to your assumptions.Asking a question you truly need the answer to helps keep a dispute or inquisition honest.  If I were really in an argument where none of my possible questions seemed to cash out in terms of action I would take, I might start to wonder whether the discussion was really a good use of either of our time. Appropriately enough, now that Pentecost is over, next week we begin the third section of Pope Francis’s book: The Letters to the Seven Churches, as the disciples go out to fulfill the Great Commission.
In this chapter of Open Mind, Faithful Heart, Pope Francis explains the Book of Revelation of following a kind of dream logic.We cannot enter into these *figures* just by interpreting them allegorically or by representing them conceptually.  They are visions, the kind of visions we have in dreams.  When we dream, we are mysteriously and forcefully moved by images and feelings that arouse in us powerful figures and forms.And, when he describes some of the visions of the book, they are so full of images, that they would be contradictions in the waking world. The image of the Lord is that of the priest (tunic and cincture), at once both old (white hair) and young (feet of burnished bronze), standing in the middle of his Church and carrying out his priestly mission.  The Lord takes the firm stand of a judge, his gaze purifies and attracts as does the sun when it shines at its brightest; his voice is heard by all and discerns like a two-edged sword.Although this vision is intended to clarify, it’s so overstuffed with signs that I can only picture it piecemeal.  I’m reminded of a scene from the musical Fun Home, when young Alison is trying to draw a picture of her family for school, and tries to put everything in.Okay, so: This is a keystone because Pennsylvania is the Keystone State. Inside this square? That’s Beech Creek, see? Bridge, ford, creek, school, Fun Home, our house, Aunt Jane and Uncle Randy’s house. This is Germany. Oh! John, Christian, me. See? Floating in bubbles because we’re not born yet –Her father’s aggressive reworking of her drawing is less confusing, but he’s lost the expansiveness that is the actual content of what she draws.As is so often the case, considering theology makes me think about topology.  In order to get my head around a Klein bottle (every cool thing about a Möbius strip, but scaled up), I usually start by thinking about each of its properties in isolation.  When I try to picture them all at once, my first images are a bit muddled, and tend to leave something out.Even the real-life instantiations of Klein bottles aren’t quite enough to get me to a full understanding.  It’s easy for me to become focused on one specific example, and to mix up which parts of the Klein bottle are essential to it, and which are the window dressing of my visualization.  The first time I saw a Klein bottle cup like the one below, I was confused, since I’d inadvertently (guided by the glass and hat examples at the top), thought of the bottles as being bell-shaped in a particular way that was not required.It’s helpful for all the images I encounter to have something jarring or crowded about them, so I don’t feel that I’ve mastered the idea by approximating it.  John’s Apocalypse preserves this sense of learning and lacking, with its dense and vivid visions.
In this week’s chapter, Pope Francis uses the falling away of the church at Ephesus as an admonitory example for our own, personal attempts to follow Christ.  The Ephesian church didn’t fall into heresy or disappear altogether, but, instead, it “abandoned the love you had at first.”  Initial passions don’t persist, but Ephesus had failed to nurture their love into a subtler, mature devotion, and were being exhorted to do so before there was no embers left to stoke.Pope Francis then turns from the experience of a city to the disposition of individuals, and the ways we can quench our love, even as we think we’re feeding and strengthening it.When people realize that they have lost the energy of their earlier passions, they respond in different ways.  Some try to perform “plastic surgery of the soul”: they seek to be like young people, adopting their styles of dress and speech.  Leaving aside the unfortunate cases, this is at best only a superficial solution, one that conceals the true challenge.  Other people, as they age, become fixed in external practices; they harden into a rigid posture that smacks of pharisaical negativity.  Questions of dress–for example, cassocks vs. jeans–may reflect inner attitudes, but what is at stake is something much deeper; it can be seen especially in our attitude toward work.The loss of our initial fervor may lead some of us into enthusiasm about what might be called “secondary tasks” or “busy work.”  Whereas our mid-life crisis is an invitation from the Lord to become more practiced in the theological virtues, we often prefer to practice the “secondary virtues,” which are more suited to busy work.  Some of us become socially involved with such eagerness that we depart from conventional liturgical forms.  Others, in contrast, become exceedingly fussy in all that has to do with ritual.  In neither case is the real challenge being honestly confronted.  Our first love must undergo conversion, which means “concentrating on Jesus Christ alone.”I could think of examples, from my own life and from those of friends, that matched Pope Francis’s descriptions very well, so I read on eagerly, hoping for a description of rightly ordered love that would be just as vivid and practical as his portraits of stunted love.  Unfortunately for me, the example he turned to as a paragon was much farther from my life: Mary upending her jar of oil over Jesus to anoint him.I could see how any of the previous examples could be earnestly, subjectively mistaken for Mary’s act of love.  Policing Pharisaical strictures can feel like love, since you’re offering something (and, often, feel persecuted as a result).  In order to follow Mary’s example correctly, Pope Francis recommends discernment, to better differentiate between our instinct to do something and our instinct to do the right thing.I’m not very good at this, as of yet, so I went casting about for a crutch, and wound up thinking of the three questions that Richard Hamming used to go around asking people at Bell Labs three questions:Hamming had a nice way of sneaking up on people.  We all have answers for why we’re doing the work we’ve taken on, so Hamming didn’t bother asking that question.  He just asked what the most important thing would be, and why we aren’t doing it.  When I’ve reframed questions like this, sometimes it turns out not be impossible to offer something to the most important problem.The oil Mary offered was expensive and extravagant.  She wasn’t holding back what she had for other causes or tasks; she had discerned the most important thing in her life and offered everything she had, as beautifully as she could.Writing this post, and applying Hamming’s questions to my spiritual life, I could immediately think of some answers for question number one (“What’s most important?”) for which my answer to the second question (“Are you working on them?”) would be ‘No.’It’s probably not the case that all my current answers to #1 are correct, but by actually engaging with them, I’d have a better chance of finding out, and being changed.  As long as I hang back, spinning my wheels, it’s hard to grow in the discernment that Pope Francis prescribes.
In this week’s chapter from Open Mind, Faithful Heart, Pope Francis is discussing the danger of punching down (in slightly more highfalutin language).For those experiencing tribulation, the great temptation is fatigue.  The constant exposure to evil makes us lose a proper notion of time so that we end up “running aimlessly” or “beating the air.”  When persecution is long and drawn out, we frequently begin to imitate the tactics of the enemy.  The arena of war–God’s war–gets reduced to minor skirmishes where we are at the enemy’s mercy.  We lose sight of the goal, and our strategy gets muddled.  We see only the occasional sniper that the enemy sends our way to wear us down in a difficult stretch.  One sign of our disorientation is our tendency to lash out against people who are really only minor enemies, and we often do so with a force that should be reserved only for our true foes.…The prince of this world, however, usurps [the] power to govern and wages his own war.  If there are any souls he cannot recruit or overcome, he seeks to win the battle by making them fight in his own arena and with his own crude arms.When we feel under threat, it’s natural to cast around for an opportunity to comfort ourselves by showing our strength, and that often means catching and hurting bystanders.  Or, as the cast of Urinetown puts after “Snuff that Girl”TINY TOM: Let’s bring our message of hate to the entire world! HOT BLADES HARRY: Easy, friend, a message like ours works best under extreme unbalanced circumstances. BOBBY: No one’s going to be killing anyone around here. SOUPY SUE: But we’re so afraid, Bobby. Killing her might make us feel powerful for a moment.The panicked viciousness of the Urinetown cast is played for laughs, so I appreciate that Pope Francis acknowledges in his chapter that sometimes we’re actually striking out at real enemies in our fear, confusion, and boredom.  The blow is still as empty as the chorus’s attempt at assassination if the fight we’re picking is a distraction from the one we ought to pick.On facebook, I see a lot of reshared links that are just examples of sucky arguments from people on “the other side.”  These threads wind up being opportunities to rehash invective that feel perilously productive.  Because we’re saying bad things about the other team, it feels like we must be advancing our own side, even though our complaints won’t be seen by our opponents and our own side has gained nothing from this expenditure of our time (surely we already knew there were dumb people on the other side).Just getting drawn into a sterile argument (as dogpiles and flamewars tend to be) is shifting from God’s arena to the crude arms and cramped ground of the prince of this world.  The only people who hear us in our own echo chamber are us, the only people who will learn or be changed by the experience are us.  So, what serves us better?  Outrage porn or getting together to volunteer, build a trebuchet, or read a play aloud?I try not to post anything I disagree with to facebook or email unless I have a question about the thing I’m linking rather than just a putdown.  And I stay out of comment threads of this type, unless I have something substantive to say (usually better to say in person!) or can trust myself to stick to a simple “Gevalt.”These countermeasures help keep me safer online, but I’m still working out better habits in person.  When I’m face to face, I have more trouble detangling myself from a useless fight, because my pride gets invested in not looking weak.  I somehow don’t think saying, “Sorry, you seem like a mere sniper in the larger fight I’m interested in” is the best approach either.  “I don’t like how I’m behaving in/approaching this disagreement” is a little better (and pleasantly vague).  Any better suggestions?
This week, in my Pope Francis reading, I found his description of… for lack of a better word, the discretion of higher truths a little confusing:Truth has great value, but it lacks immediate clout, whereas power coerces.  Paradoxically, the more noble the truth is, the less power it has.  Even simple truths have some power, because they confirm certain needs and tendencies–think, for example, of the truths that relate to our immediate vital needs.  But the more elevated the truth, the less coercive force it possesses; the spirit must grow in freedom simply in order to grasp it.  The nobler a truth, the easier it is for cruder realities to discount it or even ridicule it; it must rely even more on nobility of spirit.I found this argument a little odd, especially when Pope Francis extends it to say that holy truth, as the most exalted, has the least power to coerce.  The way I’ve always thought of these non-coercive truths is that abstract truths have less power over us simply because we don’t bump into them very much.  It took a long time to discover that Newton wasn’t the whole story, because the cases where his theory failed, and relativity turned out to be needed, were fairly rare in everyday experience.  And we still haven’t quite nailed down the truth or falsity of the Riemann Hypothesis because its consequences don’t intrude into our lives the way the consequences of, let’s say, the “Is Breathing really necessary?” Hypothesis.However, moral truths also seem to have only a weak power to compel, even though those questions are, without doubt, relevant moment to moment.  I might say that the reason that we don’t feel as compelled as we do by simple, bodily truths is that the truth has a kind of complex structure.  Let me explain using a math analogy.The Mandelbrot set is pretty simple, if you just want to describe it algorithmically: wikipedia summarizes it as “the set of complex numbers ‘c’ for which the sequence ( c , c² + c , (c²+c)² + c , ((c²+c)²+c)² + c , (((c²+c)²+c)²+c)² + c , …) does not approach infinity.”  If I were to say it with a bit less notation, I’d say that you take a complex number (one with i — the root of -1 in it) and square it, and then add itself.  Then you square the sum and add the original number again, and you just keep doing it.  You’re checking to see if the sums you keep producing are going to stay below some arbitrary number, or it they keep increasing forever, without limit.  The Mandelbrot set is what you get when you start checking every point on the complex plane and coloring it black if it satisfies these conditions.Describing the rule is easy.  Drawing the shape is harder.  And predicting whether an arbitrary point will be black or white also takes a bit of computation (though there are some pretty reliable heuristics).  In a similar way, we know some general rules about ethics — don’t harm someone without cause, do easy kindnesses without cause, etc — but might struggle to figure out how to implement them vis a vis a particular person or situation.  We know the relationship we’re supposed to cultivate (one of agape) but we have to do a few experiments to see if our present course of action trends in that direction.That’s not the whole story of why we struggle to do the right thing, but it seems plausible to me as one of the factors that causes us to not obey ethics the way we do physics.  The truth is present, and more accessible than, say, physics in a Bose-Einstein condensate, but it’s very complex at the fine-grained level, so we usually work with approximations and generalized rules, instead of the fullness of the truth.  It’s not necessarily very far from us; we just have to get farther away, retreating and retrenching in abstraction, to get a better sense of the picture.
Just a small note from this week’s chapter.  In this selection, Pope Francis contrasts the dream of Nebuchadnezzar in the Book of Daniel with the vision of God granted to John in Revelation.  Francis writes:The burnished bronze feet of the Son of God recall the statue of Nebuchadnezzar’s dream, it’s feet made partly of clay and partly of iron, a sign of fragility and division (Dan 2:41-43.  Unlike the statues alloyed feet, the “works of the Lord” must be kept undivided, and to those who faithfully keep them so the Lord “will give authority over the nations, to rule them with an iron rod, as when clay pots are shattered” (Apoc 2:27)And, for reference, here are the two passages cited.You were looking, O king, and lo! there was a great statue. This statue was huge, its brilliance extraordinary; it was standing before you, and its appearance was frightening. 32 The head of that statue was of fine gold, its chest and arms of silver, its middle and thighs of bronze, 33 its legs of iron, its feet partly of iron and partly of clay. 34 As you looked on, a stone was cut out, not by human hands, and it struck the statue on its feet of iron and clay and broke them in pieces. 35 Then the iron, the clay, the bronze, the silver, and the gold, were all broken in pieces and became like the chaff of the summer threshing floors; and the wind carried them away, so that not a trace of them could be found. But the stone that struck the statue became a great mountain and filled the whole earth.… As you saw the feet and toes partly of potter’s clay and partly of iron, it shall be a divided kingdom; but some of the strength of iron shall be in it, as you saw the iron mixed with the clay. 42 As the toes of the feet were part iron and part clay, so the kingdom shall be partly strong and partly brittle. 43 As you saw the iron mixed with clay, so will they mix with one another in marriage,[c] but they will not hold together, just as iron does not mix with clay. (Dan 2:31-35,41-43) Then I turned to see whose voice it was that spoke to me, and on turning I saw seven golden lampstands, and in the midst of the lampstands I saw one like the Son of Man, clothed with a long robe and with a golden sash across his chest. His head and his hair were white as white wool, white as snow; his eyes were like a flame of fire, his feet were like burnished bronze, refined as in a furnace, and his voice was like the sound of many waters. (Rev 1:12-15)I know a couple commenters are reading copies of Open Mind, Faithful Heart not in English (and that my own English copy is a work in translation, so I’m curious how your translators handled the word ‘alloyed’ in my text.  My translator calls the statue’s feet “alloyed” and contrasts them with bronze, which is a literal alloy, one of copper and usually tin, sometimes arsenic (per wikipedia).Once alloys are made, they usually are treated as one substance, not a melange of the things that made them — that’s why the subcomponents of the bronze feet aren’t expected to shatter and separate the way that the iron and clay feet are.  Christianity has something akin to an alloy at the heart of the salvation story — Christ himself.  His nature is fully divine and fully human, which caused a great deal of bickering among theologians.  Does He wear His humanity like a coat, able to doff it as needed?  Is He fundamentally divided?  Is He a strange mix, like the feet of the statue?Ultimately, theologians had to invent a new piece of jargon, to make some sort of sense of this mystery.  Christ’s human and divine natures are bound in a hypostatic union.  These two different natures are made one.  Calling it an alloy would probably elide some of the technical details of both metallurgy and theology, so I don’t mean to push the metaphor too far, but a great deal of Catholic worship and sacraments are a kind of asking to be alloyed.We receive Christ in the hopes that He’ll renew and remake us by uniting us to himself, so that we are strengthened and tempered by the change.  We don’t mean to simply mix in and remain as we were; we need to be more than we are at present to endure.
In his chapter on the city of Sardis, which kept up a pretense of their faith, Pope Francis turns to parental and grandparental relationships which, in his opinion, best reveal how we are handling spiritual tumult.It is easy to fool others regarding the relation we have with God.  A pious bearing, a liturgy celebrated with devout charm, a breviary open in our hands when someone enters our room–these are acquired postures, masks that we have worn so convincingly that even we come to believe that we are pious and worthy of respect…We may even learn to disguise the petulance of old age with elegance, modulating our manners and refraining from any show of emotion that might reveal our mood.  A dispassionate spirit can also be a mask or even a shell: not only does it protect us from others, but it quells every torment within us before it can even arise.With young people and our children, however, it is hard to fake “respectability.”  The young have a sort of sixth sense with regard to older folk.  They respect some of them and feel close to them; they treat them with affection, seek them out, and ask their advice… Some older folk, on the other hand, are ignored or scorned by the young.  Youngsters would never think of approaching them of their own accord; their respect for them is only formal.Small children are a good countermeasure to what C.S. Lewis called attraction to the Inner Ring — the desire for advancement for the sake of advancement, the need to know that you belong to some exclusive coterie, and thus you are better than the people outside.  Children are more likely to care about your actions moment-to-moment, rather than the reputation you’ve acquired from past deeds.  It makes no difference to them that you are known to be patient, if you won’t play peekaboo with them more than once or twice (and that halfheartedly).Pope Francis brings up these tendencies of children to argue that they can act as a metric of our kindness, love, and spiritual development, but, in my experience, they’ve also acted as a medicine.  When I get to visit my friend with the very delightful toddler, the girl isn’t entertained by any of my vices, so the time I spend with her is time I’m less tempted to indulge them.  She doesn’t care about how cleverly snide I can be and doesn’t admire me for any hard thing I can take pride in at all.  She does, however, like the voices I do while reading Llama Llama Red Pajama.When I’m looking for ways to entertain a child, I’m more likely to read aloud, or to try to find something fun to play with in our immediate surroundings, or to rethink what could make a very good hat (an egg cup!).  There’s a reason, after all, I’m always glad to see a toddler or kindergartner on my train car; they’re quite likely to be loudly delighted at the existence of a train (“We’re on the train!”  “We’re moving again!”)  When I’m around them, I’m drawn a little more into the affect that G.K. Chesterton describes in Orthodoxy.The thing I mean can be seen, for instance, in children, when they find some game or joke that they specially enjoy. A child kicks his legs rhythmically through excess, not absence, of life. Because children have abounding vitality, because they are in spirit fierce and free, therefore they want things repeated and unchanged. They always say, “Do it again”; and the grown-up person does it again until he is nearly dead. For grown-up people are not strong enough to exult in monotony. But perhaps God is strong enough to exult in monotony. It is possible that God says every morning, “Do it again” to the sun; and every evening, “Do it again” to the moon. It may not be automatic necessity that makes all daisies alike; it may be that God makes every daisy separately, but has never got tired of making them. It may be that He has the eternal appetite of infancy; for we have sinned and grown old, and our Father is younger than we.This all isn’t to minimize the work and sacrifice that children require, but Chesterton and Pope Francis’s perspectives offer some pretty good reasons for childless adults like me to consider helping out our friends with children, and, by doing so, being helped ourselves.
We’re nearly at the end of the “Letters to the Seven Churches” section of Pope Francis’s book, and most of the letters discussed have had an air of fraternal correction.  However, this week’s letter to Philadelphia and the discussion that follows is pure joy.  Pope Francis explains it as follows:What is love is love plain and simple, and such love is completely protected and guaranteed by the Lord.  All the other qualities of the churches are relative, qualities such as the patience of Ephesus and her ability to discern.  Relative also are the sins of the churches: those of Pergamum for being divided and not standing strong, those of Thyatira for her self-interested toleration of false prophets, and those of Sardis for appearing alive when she is really dead.  What is absolute is love among sisters and brothers, the apex of charity, and the Lord blesses it with every prize.  No one can remain neutral with regard to Philadelphia: whoever fails to love her and follow her lead will end up envying her.Unfortunately, this chapter is a little too short and abstract for me to fall easily into love or envy.  I usually wind up needing a lot of specific examples to get a sense of what agape looks like.  I can understand, intellectually, that it involves willing the good of others, born out of a love for them, not just a love of rules, but it’s hard for me to get a sense of what that means in practice, internally or externally.One way of putting it, is that I’m blind to a lot of the affordances of the people of Philadelphia.  An ‘affordance’ is, per wikipedia:[A] relation between an object, or an environment, and an organism that affords the opportunity for that organism to perform an action. For example, a knob affords twisting, and perhaps pushing, while a cord affords pulling. As a relation, an affordance exhibits the possibility of some action, and is not a property of either an organism or its environment alone.Familiarity with an object (or a lot of creative thinking) makes it easier to spot affordances.  Because I’m a tinkerer, it’s easy for me to jerry-rig substitutes for broken/missing tools (This flashlight can be a hammer!  The floor + my tuchus can be a vise!) — every object around me has a lot more affordances than just their primary ones.The people of Philadelphia have more affordances for agape than I do by default, or even when I sit around and try to brainstorm more.  In order to build up the disposition at the heart of their love, I need plenty of specific examples of actions that start to give me an idea of how their perspective of the world differs from my own.Think of it as an ethical/spiritual CT scan — assembling a fuller model from many little slices.  Absent those concrete examples, Pope Francis’s description of the love of the Philadelphians was too far away from my sickly love to be able to connect with me and stir me up.
Apropos of yesterday’s post on friendship, this week’s chapter from Pope Francis focuses on the “Because you are lukewarm, and neither cold nor hot, I am about to spit you out of my mouth” passage from Revelation 3:16.When dealing with strangers, we are surprised to encounter strong emotions, whether hatred or gratitude, but with friends it is different.  We feel stunned when they are only lukewarm toward us.  That is the great sin against friendship.  A lukewarm attitude conceals the opportunistic types, those “eternally perplexed” persons who are always wondering whether to commit themselves or not.  They are forever waiting as they make their precise calculations.  They are irreproachable; nothing “bothers” them.Pope Francis argues that these lukewarm friends are selfish, refusing to commit or make a gift of themselves, but, in the times when I behave this way, the temptation feels like prudence.  Or, to put it more jargonly, minimaxing.Minimaxing is the art of trying to minimize your potential losses, even at the risk of limiting your future gains.  It’s a good strategy if you’re playing some zero-sum game against a brutal (and skilled) opponent.  In every turn, you expect your partner to pick the action that will hurt you most, so you play defensively, trying to limit the damage they can do.I’m currently at the CFAR alumni reunion, and I notice myself being lukewarm in some conversations with something akin to this motivation.  When a conversation stalls, I’m too quick to ask a boring question “So, remind me where you’re working these days?” that is intended mainly to avoid the “worst next move” — an awkward silence.  But, “Where do you work?” isn’t a question that leads very naturally to friendship and non-lukewarmness, so, when I default to that question, I’m usually just treading water, not getting to know my interlocutor better.Approaching new people with a minimax strategy would make more sense if our primary goal were to keep everyone’s opinions of us from dipping below some critical value.  But, in order to make friends, it makes more sense to be you earlier (with all the variance that implies) so the potential new friend can make up zer mind, and move more quickly to strong attraction or repulsion. Today is the fifth day of my novena to St. Maximilian Kolbe.  Free free to pray along.
In this week’s chapter, Pope Francis uses the parable of the Good Samaritan to shed light on exactly what criteria Christ will use to sift the weeds from the wheat:In the end, we will all be judged on whether we have “become neighbors” of all flesh, on whether we have drawn close to suffering flesh.Many do not draw near at all; they keep a distance, like the Levite and the priest in the parable [of the Good Samaritan].  Others draw close by intellectualizing the pain or taking reference in platitudes (“life’s like that”).I am, as you may expect, very very bad at this.  I’m prone to intellectualize all things in the first place, and, in the second (somewhat related) place, I spent a lot of time as a kid-through-college-student practicing Stoicism.  So though I may be useful to suffering flesh, I am seldom, if ever, close to it.When I was a little kid, I wound up finding and reading my parents’ copy of You Just Don’t Understand! Women and Men in Conversation by Deborah Tannen.  Tannen wrote that, in general, when a friend had a problem, women were more likely to discuss how the friend felt (“That’s awful” “You must be so frustrated” etc) while men were more likely to try to solve the problem.I instantly recognized myself in the latter category.  Sitting around and talking about feelings seemed to me like trying to scrub blood off a floor before you applied a tourniquet to your friend’s wound.  The unhappiness was a response to some outside source, and it seemed only prudent to me to manage the problem first and then cheer people up after, if any jollying was even necessary at that point.One of the guys I dated even recommended me to a friend as a problem solver saying, “That sounds pretty hard.  You should talk to Leah about it.  She doesn’t have any feelings, so she’ll be really helpful.”  The mutual friend of me and the then-boyfriend assumed “she has no feelings” was perjorative and tried (completely unnecessarily) to convince my then-boyfriend to patch up whatever fight we were in.  My petit ami was forced to clarify that he meant “Leah has no feelings that will distract her from solving your problem.”I’ve come up with better ways to offer something for my friends’ emotional needs in moments of crisis, but it still feels pretty Chinese room-y to me.  To me, the repetition of “There, there” “I’m so sorry” and all that feels generic, more like a stochastic process, the kind of thing it would be easy to write a chatbot (or a chatbot/baby harp seal!) to do, even though my kind of “help” is probably also fairly algorithmizable.Are there things you commenters do to be better disposed to be the Good Samaritan to others, rather than the good troubleshooting dialogue box?
In this week’s chapter, Pope Francis contrasts Abraham with Lot, the latter too willing to cling to his present place and moment to follow the Lord where he leads.  In the course of his exegesis, he draws this distinction:Those who set out on an exodus from themselves make a definite option: they prefer time to space.  They are betting on time, for time always opens onto the horizon of eternity; it knows nothing of “competition” for space.  But this journey in time is not without it hidden traps, for we sometimes camouflage space in the guise of time.  We believe that we are “on exodus” in the dimension of time, which is always God’s domain (what Blessed Peter Faber calls the “Messenger of God”), but we unwittingly create domains of possession.  That “great moment” we experience as something absolute and definitive is merely the result of our turning time into space.  God is not there,  We have settled down; it is our executive office disguised as the pilgrim’s trail… And since all reduction of realities is forced and violent, the space in which we travel as peers of the realm is nothing but a labyrinth.As usual, I like my theology best in the form of topology analogies.  And I really like this paragraph because it helps to create a positive vision of what Christians often describe as death to self (and which is frequently muddled together with Buddhist non-attachment).  Here, the Christian is reluctant to hold too tightly to the present moment because she longs for something larger, not because she is systematically limiting her ability to desire.When Pope Francis talks about the limited labyrinths we build, I naturally thought of a torus.  (Or, as it’s known in the non-topology world, a donut).  As you can see in the (slightly slow moving gif below) you can make a torus out of any finite, flat sheet.  You just join up one set of ends to make a cylinder, and then stitch the cylinder’s ends together to create the donut.  (Note, not how edible donuts are made).A torus might feel infinite to someone living on it’s surface (like, say the protagonists of Sphereland) because you can walk and walk and never reach an edge, but it’s a very small kind of infinity, formed by just gluing all the edges of your original landscape together so that you don’t have to look at them.  But, once you construct the torus, your focus is on it, not the infinite space that it is embedded in.When Christians interact with the world, it’s certainly permissible to love and delight in people, moments, and things — the thing to be on guard against is not any attachment but a false understanding of these small, constrained things as satisfying the love and desire for the transcendent that, Augustine says, makes our hearts restless until they rest in Thee. I’m on day 6 of a Norbertine novena, in honor of my friend Michael Hannon, who just entered the abbey.  Please feel free to pray along.
At the beginning of this week’s chapter, Pope Francis refers to a theologian who argues that prayer exists because we are imperfect and separated from God.  If we weren’t sundered by sin, there would be no need to ask for objects or explanations, because we would be a deeper kind of communion with God, and our current forms of prayer would be superfluous.But, in the world we do live in, prayer must be directed at eventually healing that wound of separation and restoring us to a full relationship with God, thus, for Pope Francis, prayer isn’t just a means of communication but a way of inviting and accepting change and growth.In each case, flesh is required, for only flesh can be divested and passed through the crucible of contempt, dislodgement, derision, and humiliation…The obedience required for prayer affects our lives and wounds our flesh. Let me explain. The ordinary conception of prayer is “asking God for things” or “asking God to change situations that are difficult for us.” No doubt, this is true prayer; even the Lord urges us to pray this way. But there is another basis for our prayer, arising from the certainty of our hope, as I mentioned above. Prayer touches the very depths of our flesh; it touches our heart. It is not God who changes; rather it is we who change, through obedience and surrender in prayer.Pope Francis gives several examples of people being sustained by prayer in extreme circumstances: Abraham with his son, Elijah in his despair, Jesus in the garden of Gethsemane.  Even as they were tested, because they remained close to God, their trials helped them see their missions more clearly, with greater joy.One thing that occurred to me, as I read his exegeses, is that prayer strengthens the best part of ourselves, and allows us to go through the crucible of suffering and emerge, purer, on the other side.  If we allow our sin to thoroughly pervade us so that it is too bound up in everything that makes us us to be able to even wish (or comprehend the wish) to cast it out, then suffering will just be self-erasure and lead to despair.But someone who has clung closely to God and strengthened what is most like Christ in themselves (through prayer and the Eucharist), can go through a process of ablation and wind up bringing the best part of themselves to the surface.  In the world we live in, where people are internally divided, and, thus, wind up in enmities with other people and the world itself, turbulence and struggle is a given.  What prayer provides is a chance to be sustained and refined by difficult circumstances. 
 In this week’s chapter, Pope Francis praises the way that David follows God during the chaos of Absalom’s rebellion:David places his liberty at the service of God’s designs and cooperates with God’s desires.  In so doing, he does not lose what he himself called “prudence,” which is simply providing the human means that God requires and then letting God act.  David cares for his people and does not abandon them,  He does not burn the city; he does not cremate history.  He leaves some followers in the city who will counteract the influence of Absalom’s supporters (2 Sam 15:30-36).  Complete surrender to God sets David’s horizons and gives him greatness of soul.  But his surrender is not passive servility; rather, it is the dedication of the astute servant who unfailingly places his talents at the service of his lord.  In this case, David submits his talents to the will of his God, who wants to dispossess him, but not his people.Reading this passage brought to mind debates about “taking the Benedict option” which tends to mean carving out a little space separate from the world, but lying close enough to it that the secular world can hear tell of you and come visit and learn (à la a Benedictine monastery).  In this passage, even as David is being put to flight, he maintains connections to the land he must flee, both through the remnant of followers that he leaves, and by returning God’s Ark to Jerusalem, so that God remains in the city, even when His king has been driven out.Since my local debating circle is gearing up to fight over “Resolved: Send Your Children to Public School,” several of my friends have been discussing what ties to maintain when they try to follow God by turning away from a culture in revolt.  One of my Catholic friends would prefer not to send his children to public school since he find the public square period to be too libertine, relativist, and antithetical to the values he wants to offer his children.I pointed out that, if his assessment is correct, that for him and parents like him to withdraw their students would probably lead to an evaporative cooling of group beliefs, where the trends he disliked were entrenched or accelerated, since more students would grow up exposed primarily only to the assumptions he found distasteful.  He replied, reasonably enough, that the New Evangelization can’t and shouldn’t be built primarily on the backs of seven-year-olds.But the conversation did leave me wondering where people taking a Benedictine or Davidic approach to a hostile culture planned to leave their infiltrators, if not among the children.  There are few to none circumstances that throw together all the adults of a particular neighborhood the ways that schools mix up their children (and wind up forcing the parents to meet).  A family attending parochial school will see the same people they already see at church, but won’t have a reason to meet the other residents of their street (since we tend not to live in an age of block parties or unsupervised play in the street).Without relying on schools to provide some random noise to our social circles, where will adults find opportunities to witness or to learn from others and wind up converting themselves?  What else throws us together, over the long term, in unchosen fraternity and sorority?  Are there arbitrary weak-tie creating institutions that you commenters encounter, that I haven’t aged into, or is school the primary way we can expect to be thrown together with our neighbors?
This chapter is called “The Solitude of Prayer” but, as I read Pope Francis’s meditations on exile — the first, individual one, experienced by Adam and Eve, the Babylonian exile endured by the Jews, the state of Christians described in the Letter to the Hebrews, and, finally, back to the individual in prayer, I felt much more connected to others.  Pope Francis describes the experience of separation from God as follows:In its pilgrimage, our flesh feels nostalgia for the homeland, and it voices its longing deliberately and explicitly in prayer, in the presence of the glorious Lord, the Lord of that homeland we yearn for.  Meanwhile, our flesh is caught between feelings and numbness, between grace and sin, between deference and rebellion.  It feels the oppression of exile and dreads the long road it must walk; it struggles valiantly to defend its hope.  The day that our nostalgia dies, our flesh will cease to pray.  Seeking release from exile and from wandering in a strange land, it will make this world its homeland.  It will tire of seeking after God.This was a different take on the experience of being alien/foreign in the world that I’m most used to, the one from C.S. Lewis’s Mere Christianity:Christianity agrees with Dualism that this universe is at war. But it does not think this is a war between independent powers. It thinks it is a civil war, a rebellion, and that we are living in a part of the universe occupied by the rebel.Enemy-occupied territory-that is what this world is. Christianity is the story of how the rightful king has landed, you might say landed in disguise, and is calling us all to take part in a great campaign of sabotage. When you go to church you are really listening-in to the secret wireless from our friends: that is why the enemy is so anxious to prevent us from going.I’ve liked the romance and urgency of Lewis’s framing since the first time I’ve seen it, but even though Lewis’s story is explicitly about conspiracy, I’ve tended to think about it as a solitary endeavor.  Partially as carry-over from my Stoic-leanings, I prioritize things withing my locus of control — I think of myself as a lone operative, living in secret, focused on what I can do, alone.  I don’t think as much about cultivating and maintaining nostalgia and love for the homeland I’m serving (due to Kantian-leanings, I try to work off of duty alone, unless I deliberately reflect).  I think less about what to do in community, particularly when it’s something as comforting (which I tend to reinterpret as ‘indulgent’) as reflecting on the home we’re seeking and rejoicing in each other’s love for it.But Francis’s consideration of exile as a pilgrimage focused my thoughts on the other pilgrims.  It’s exhausting to live in exile, and I think I’d do a lot better to think about more of my interactions with others through this framework.  When I run into people who are sad or brusque or even cruel, I should do more to remember that I’m interacting with someone who is tired and who encounters far less fellowship than ze thirsts for.  I’m meeting someone who has to speak everything in a foreign, clumsy language, which is often frustratingly misunderstood.But I don’t mean by all of this simply that I should be a bit more patient with people (though it’s not a bad idea!).  The person I’m talking to is strained by living in exile, but I don’t have to be content simply accomodating the difficulty; I can ameliorate it.  A premise of Christianity is that we are all exiles together, alien to this world, but not to each other (though we may certainly be alienated).  I should be welcoming people in a way that makes it feel like they’ve found some connection to home, not just a bit of hospitality from a stranger.It seems like I should be trying to pull off the same kind of trick that a currently dead blog described in the context of recognizing and collaborating with fellow exiles:Imagine two Soviet spies in the Cold War US who have to get in contact with one another. The KGB forgot to give them a silly code phrase like “the wombat feeds at midnight” so they’ve got to figure it out on their own. The Americans know these two spies are trying to get in contact, so if one were to just ask random people “Are you a Soviet spy?” the Americans could quickly guess that the asker was a spy and arrest him.You are one of the two spies, and you spot someone who you’re about 50% sure is your colleague. How do you confirm they are also a spy with the lowest possible risk of getting arrested?I bet there’s some fancy cryptographic solution here, but my intuitive strategy would be as follows:Me: Excuse me, sir, do you know any good borscht restaurants around here? Other Spy: Ah, borscht. I love borscht! Me: I hear Russian borscht is the best. Have you ever had any? Other Spy: Yes, I was in Moscow once many years ago, before the war. Me: Really? Have you ever been to [street the KGB headquarters is on?] Other Spy: All the time! That’s my favorite street! I used to talk to [name of KGB head] a lot. Me: I am a Soviet spy. Are you one too? Other Spy: Yes.You would be immediately under suspicion if you asked patriotic Americans “Are you a Soviet spy?”, since they would then know you were probably the other spy yourself. So instead you lead up with a question that seems innocuous to an American who’s not thinking about spying, but to a Soviet who is specifically looking for another spy is sorta kinda suggestive of Russia. The other spy can’t just say “Ah, I understand your code, I too am a spy” because then he might blow his cover to an American who was just looking for some good borscht. So he says something that slightly escalates the Russianness. You can’t just blow your cover now, because you’re still not sure he’s not just an American who appreciates a good plate of borscht himself, so you escalate the Russianness slightly further. In other words, you start off with a conversation that could happen by coincidence, decrease the chance of coincidence a little bit at each exchange only once you get the signal from the other, and eventually the conversation becomes one that couldn’t possibly happen by coincidence and you know he’s the other spy.The question is how to welcome people.  What are the little marks of fellowship I should cultivate to allow others to feel comfortable reaching out to me, to test if they’ve found someone from home?  Kindness, sure, and patience.  But the attitude that this framing makes me consider is one of “recognition/relief.”  What can I do to welcome other people with a sense of “Finally! I’ve been waiting” and have it be true?
In this week’s selection, Pope Francis discusses the way Moses is developed, morally and spiritually, through prayer, especially through the act of turning away from unworthy petitions.When God proposes to give Moses a new people to lead, the prophet objects strongly and intercedes for Israel.  Here we see Moses’ greatness of soul, for he renounces the dream of every leader; he refuses to have the people made to his own measure.  Instead, Moses reminds God of his promise and tells him that the promise is non negotiable: salvation cannot yield to human triumphalism…What is at work in the book of Exodus is a kind of divine pedagogy by which God makes his servant into an intercessor: by exchanging roles and exaggerating the contradiction, God dissolves the angry reproach of Moses and brings forth the best from his worthy heart.  The prophet understands that he should not be ashamed of his own flesh and blood  He realizes that by interceding he is not simply performing an obligatory function; rather, he loves his sisters and brothers as himself.  He has thrown his lot in with this people, and, in so doing, he is becoming day by day more like God himself: “If we are faithless, he remains faithful–for he cannot deny himself” (2 Tim 2:13).Praying forces me to make my wishes for other people explicit, which gives me the chance to see if I endorse my desires.  Like Moses, I might be tempted sometimes to simply wish people away and replaced with people I can do more with, neglecting my obligation to these particular people.  This is one reason I appreciate the Catholic focus on Mary as intercessor and as mother.There are prayers that I might be tempted to offer to God as Great Administrator and General Orderer of Things that I couldn’t imagine asking of a parent.  If I have a problem with a sibling, I know my mother would never want only to neutralize the problem — the solution is incomplete if all we do is stop bothering each other without reentering into love of each other.  A parent is never satisfied with détente.Neither is God, but it can be harder to keep that in mind, simply because I have a lot less experience having any sort of relationship with God, and it’s easier to fall into the habit of imagining a maximally convenient God, one made to my measure.  It’s easier for me to stay honest by referring back to relationships I know well, and noticing that the petitions I’m offering would never be endorsed by a parent who loves both me and my erstwhile antagonist.For Moses, it was easier to catch himself in this kind of error, without reference to a mediatrix, since he had personally walked with God, grown up with the history of God’s love for his people, etc.  For me, a great deal younger and less experienced in the faith, Mary as model and intercessor helps me avoid running away into abstraction and distance and makes it easier for the act of prayer to wind up pedagogical. Today is the seventh day of a novena to St. Therese of Lisieux, timed to end on her feast day (Oct 1), which is also the One Rose Invitation Day, sponsored by Imagine Sisters
 In this week’s reading, Pope Francis discusses what we do with untransfigured pain and suffering:Our limitation and our weakness can be transformed by prayer into a cross…. The problem is that when we concentrate only on external hindrances, we stop praying and start complaining.  We are no longer servants of the Gospel but take on victim status.  We canonize ourselves and seek to do away with all limitations.  We learn to disguise our weakness with the incense of our saintly status.  The victim is not Christ; it is myself.  This is the beginning of all blasphemy, and blasphemy is the highest form of anti-prayer.…Flesh that is accustomed to blasphemy, flesh that knows nothing of seeking help for its own sinful sores, is flesh that is unable to help with the sores of others.  It will invidiously keep its distance from the other.  It will never be a neighbor to anyone but itself.I think I treat complaining the same way I do the cheap grocery store cookies that turned up in our apartment after a party.  Even though I’ve tasted them before, and I know they weren’t particularly satisfying (in fact, they’re cloying), once they’ve been put out, I don’t believe my own experience.  It feels natural to reach out and take one, even though I can predict exactly what will happen: I’ll eat one, not particularly enjoy it, and then be bothered by the aftertaste.In a similar way, when I am frustrated, I have a desire to complain to other people, even though, just like the cookie, I’ve tried it often enough before to know that the taste is pretty much ashes in my mouth.  Complaining is different than seeking help with confusion, for which other people are useful, as I try to decide what to do.  Complaining is more a way I respond to things outside my locus of control, that doesn’t wind up guiding my actions (since no action is needed).  Just like I half-expect the cookies to be delicious, I half-expect complaining to be cathartic, but it pretty much never is.I’m usually just gossiping about another person, who wouldn’t be known at all to my interlocutor but for my carping, and really doesn’t deserve to be introduced through the story of how they inconvenienced me or hurt my feelings.  I’ve engineered a situation that cannot be cathartic, since if my friend reacted strongly (“What a bitch!“) I’d know it was unjust, and that I’d drawn a friend into anger, but, after a lengthy vent, the true response (“Ah, too bad.  The other person must be having a rough week, too.”) feels like an anticlimax.I don’t quite take the path of King Midas’s hairdresser, digging a hole and whispering my kvetch.  Usually, I ping-pong between not complaining, but being distracted by the desire to, and complaining and being disappointed by the results.I know what the solution to this kind of “I do not do the good I want, but the evil I do not want is what I do” problem is when it occurs at the scale of cookies.  I don’t buy them in the first place.  And I throw them out if someone gives them to me.But I’m less clear on what to do with intangible sources of temptation.  Any successes to share?
I say, Jeeves, would you pass the Blood of Christ?In this week’s chapter, Pope Francis discusses Job and says that, once Job entered into the depth of his suffering, Job was uniquely ready to address God, if only because his need went beyond what the wise men of his community could answer.  Pope Francis goes on to develop a theme of praying out of woundedness (that, admittedly, I didn’t quite feel like I got).The word of God has creative force, and once God speaks a word to us, it can only become Word made flesh.  But to receive the gift of the Word made flesh, we must hear it from our fleshly neediness, from our wounds, from our own debility.  Otherwise, the flesh would wax proud.  This is why the Lord comes for the sake of the sickly and not the healthy.The part of this that is easiest for me to understand is the way that pride and strength can choke off mercy.  Mercy is a gift, and a sorely needed one.  When it arrives, it comes with a sense of spaciousness that’s almost dizzying.  But the temptation is to not acknowledge that you were in dire straits to begin with.“Thanks for the help, I was about to get to that” is a very different sentiment than “Thank you, I could not have done that for myself.”The inbreaking of mercy to heal something festering reminds me of this quotation from G.K. Chesterton’s Orthodoxy.And in dealing with those whose morbidity has a touch of mania, modern science cares far less for pure logic than a dancing Dervish. In these cases it is not enough that the unhappy man should desire truth; he must desire health. Nothing can save him but a blind hunger for normality, like that of a beast. A man cannot think himself out of mental evil; for it is actually the organ of thought that has become diseased, ungovernable, and, as it were, independent. He can only be saved by will or faith. The moment his mere reason moves, it moves in the old circular rut; he will go round and round his logical circle, just as a man in a third-class carriage on the Inner Circle will go round and round the Inner Circle unless he performs the voluntary, vigorous, and mystical act of getting out at Gower Street. … Curing a madman is not arguing with a philosopher; it is casting out a devil.Every attempt to shrink aid down to something smaller than mercy, so that it’s just kind or thoughtful, to remake it the kind of thing that can be accepted pleasantly and easily, because you could have done without it, but feel lucky to get to take the easier path, is a denial of its nature.  It makes it harder to ask for mercy rather than just a bit of help and to make the kind of leap that Chesterton prescribes for the morbid mind.Richard Beck, author of The Slavery of Death, wrote recently that he sees this shying away from the full acknowledgement of mercy at many of the churches he visits.  This kind of narrowing winds up kneecapping the triumphal message of the Christus Victor understanding of the Resurrection.  Beck writes:For Christus Victor theology to make any sense you have to have a robust theology of those dark enslaving powers, a robust theology regarding our spiritual bondage to the powers of death, Satan and sin. And yet, because of their pervasive struggles with doubt and disenchantment, along with their post-evangelical reluctance to talk about our enslavement to sin, progressive Christians lack an important aspect of Christus Victor atonement: a vision of enslavement to dark spiritual powers.Basically, what are you being rescued from if you aren’t enslaved to anything in the first place?The goal is to be able to recognize our own propensity to cruelty and fear, before we hit bottom, if possible, so we can properly recognize the opportunity for caritas as liberation, not just something we were surely going to pick up any day now.  Along with that gym membership. I’m on Day 2 of a Novena to Mary, Undoer of Knots.  Please feel free to join me!
The most striking line I found in this week’s meditation from Pope Francis came as he discussed the righteous Pharisee (the one from Luke 18:9-14).Prayer is born out of history and life.  To pray is to reread in the light of faith the history of every exile, every exodus, every road back home.  The Pharisee in the temple was not praying out of his life; he was avoiding life and history.  He was praying on the margins of life because, in declaring himself righteous, he thought himself non-historical.It’s clear, in the Gospel, that the Pharisee is distancing himself from the tax collector with whom he finds himself at prayer, and I had figured that was fault enough.  The Pharisee’s contempt for the other man is the same as viewing him as disposable.  What Pope Francis made clearer to me is that the Pharisee can’t draw a sharp division between him and the tax collector except by drawing a very small circle, and placing himself on the lonely side of it.As G.K. Chesterton puts it:[H]is mind moves in a perfect but narrow circle. A small circle is quite as infinite as a large circle; but, though it is quite as infinite, it is not so large… There is such a thing as a narrow universality; there is such a thing as a small and cramped eternity… [I]s it really in your small and painful pity that all flesh must put its faith? How much happier you would be, how much more of you there would be, if the hammer of a higher God could smash your small cosmos, scattering the stars like spangles, and leave you in the open, free like other men to look up as well as down!The Pharisee cannot achieve union with God as long as he refuses to share in God’s love for all people, even someone in as terrible a job (at the time) as a tax collector or as agape-stunted as himself.  By holding on to hate, he shuts the doors of heaven against himself.And, in the same stroke, he throws away the earth, rejecting the declaration of the Roman playwright Terence, who said Homo sum, humani nihil a me alienum puto, or “I am a human being, I consider nothing that is human alien to me.”If the Pharisee refuses to love the tax collector as a brother, the world has no other kind of siblings to furnish him with–not from the very beginning of time to its end.  Declaring himself righteous is declaring himself a singleton.
When I read this week’s selection from Open Mind, Faithful Heart: Reflections on Following Jesus, I was particularly struck by the way Pope Francis makes a connection between Simeon’s age and his prophetic role.  Pope Francis writes:Old Simeon’s flesh is weary of life; it is flesh that has retreated from passions and from attempts to control God; it is flesh that lets itself be led by the Spirit, who promises it consolation.  …Simeon is the human face of the merciful Father.  In the parable of the Prodigal Son, the father waits for his boy to return from the sin into which he has voluntary exiled himself, but in Simeon we see the father who awaits not the return from exile, but the coming of the new flesh of the Son, who voluntarily exiles himself to save us (cf Phil 2:5-11, Heb 1:3).  We see incarnate in Simeon all the expectation of the prophets, especially Isaiah, the indefatigable prophet of the people’s new exodus.There’s a kind of authority that Simeon acquires by virtue of being old, by virtue of having spend a long time with a part of his heart missing, so that he can recognize it when Love comes home to make him whole.  By the time the Christ child appears in his life, Simeon has had a whole lifetime of offering love to others and receiving it, believing in error that some current attachment can make him complete and realizing his mistake, etc.When he recognizes the messiah, he is not in danger of being carried away in a fit of youthful exuberance — thinking every new strong feeling–the strongest yet–must represent the pinnacle of existence.Reading this passage, I was most struck by how few Simeon’s are in my life, apart from my father.  Because of the age-segregation of my neighborhood and my social circle, I know almost no one over thirty well (so I needn’t worry about whether they’re trustworthy) and I am not even acquainted with almost anyone over 60.Per Pope Francis, I’m presumably not just missing out on the experiences and wisdom they may have gained, but also what they know has remained out of their reach — what makes them still feel like the waiting father of the prodigal or the nation of Israel in the Exodus — what keeps them from feeling totally satisfied or at home and prompts them to keep looking and reaching outward (as Simeon does in prayer and service).That hunger — which can only really be believed from someone who has had the chance to satisfy it, if the world really offered a way to still restless hearts — is instructive to those of us who are young, who might otherwise be tempted to just throw ourselves harder into relationships, work, or what have we, in order to find a way to escape Simeon’s prophetic sense of expectation.
(from this fascinating article on art restoration)When I read this week’s chapter of Pope Francis’s book, I was quickly drawn down a wikipedia rabbithole by one particular word Francis chose to use as he discussed how we speak with God in prayer:By intercession, we gain access to the Father and discover new facets in concrete situations that allow us to change them…. What our intercession makes possible is greater clarity of revelation: God’s power, love, loyalty, and fidelity can never change, since he is always faithful–but they can become more creatively manifest to us in our world.That is why intercession assumes familiarity with God and the ability to address God with that bold discourse (parrhesia) of which we spoke before.I looked up parrhesia, and was particularly struck by these two parts of the relevant wikipedia page:The Greek intellectual concept of parrhesia appears in Midrashic literature as an essential attribute in the transmission of Torah. Connoting open and public communication, parrhesia appears often in combination with the term, demos (publicly). As a mode of communication it is repeatedly described in terms analogous to a Public Domain or Commons. Dimus Parrhesia is closely associated with an ownerless wilderness of primary mytho-geographic import, the Midbar Sinai in which the Torah was initially received. The dissemination of Torah thus depends on its teachers cultivating a nature which is as open, ownerless, and sharing as that wilderness. The term is important to advocates of Open Source Judaism.And then, this excerpt from Foucault’s Fearless Speech:So you see, the parrhesiastes is someone who takes a risk. Of course, this risk is not always a risk of life. When, for example, you see a friend doing something wrong and you risk incurring his anger by telling him he is wrong, you are acting as a parrhesiastes. In such a case, you do not risk your life, but you may hurt him by your remarks, and your friendship may consequently suffer for it. If, in a political debate, an orator risks losing his popularity because his opinions are contrary to the majority’s opinion, or his opinions may usher in a political scandal, he uses parrhesia. Parrhesia, then, is linked to courage in the face of danger: it demands the courage to speak the truth in spite of some danger. And in its extreme form, telling the truth takes place in the “game” of life or death.The funny thing is that the person who is a parrhesiastes before God, who speaks openly, reserving nothing of themself out of caution or desire for strategic advantage, has nothing to fear.  The point of parrhesia is furthering total union/communion with God — our natural end.  If we approach God in that way, he will receive us with love; there is no analogous danger to the one that Foucault describes if we approach another human in this way.  The courage required is in recognizing that this relationship is different than all the other ones we share.Carrying the openness we have before God into the other spheres of our life is a risk, but it’s also a witness, as the Midrashic discussion implies.  Acting as a parrhesiastes is an eschatological sign of something beyond the ordinary functioning of this world.  We develop this way of relating by praying in this spirit with God (or, asking to be led into this spirit, if we don’t feel up to it on the first, second, etc try), and then we get a little better at approximating this spirit of self-gift in our other relationships, and awakening a hunger for communion in others.
This week’s chapter is only three and a half pages long, and I feel like it sorely needed to be expanded.  As Pope Francis discusses Judith’s beheading of Holofernes, he emphasizes the way that her faith is guided by her “memory-soaked flesh,” her connection to the history of the Jews relation to God.  Francis’s own prose is allusion-soaked as he writes:Judith prays even while in action: both before and after she beheads Holofernes, she calls upon the Lord.  Her action is truly dramatic, for the truest drama is that which takes between our freedom and God’s (Jdt 13:4-10).  There is no question here of the self-sufficiency of Tosca’s lethal kiss (questo è il baccio) or of Macbeth’s debate with himself about killing the king.  The sufficiency here is in the tragedy.  What we see in Judith is true salvation history, the struggle between freedom and grace.[...]Judith believes neither in quietism nor in deal-making.  She does not isolate herself in self-sufficiency, nor does she retreat into insecurity.  What cries out to God and lets God act is simply her memory-filled woundedness.This passage is enough, if it were on a flyer advertising a lecture, to guarantee my attendance, but it isn’t enough for me to actually understand what Pope Francis is explaining.  It’s too bad, because it feels like if I could grok it better, Francis’s discussion of Judith acting out of “memory-filled woundedness” would speak somehow to Catherine’s essay about her struggles with the sanctity-through-suffering of St. Catherine of Siena.I’d be interested in your thoughts, or anything you can do to expand on the contrast Pope Francis is drawing between Judith and Tosca and Macbeth.  (I’m only familiar with the Shakespeare, myself).I think the main thing I have to add is that I recommend the historical fiction novel The Passion of Artemisia by Susan Vreeland, which I greatly enjoyed.  It is Artemisia’s portrait of Judith slaying Holofernes that is at the top of this post.(Now’s probably time to caveat my recommendation by saying that I really love books that have long descriptions of things being made: Tamora Pierce’s Circle of Magic quartet, the furniture repair sections of Donna Tartt’s The Goldfinch (and pretty much only those parts), and even non-fiction instruction manuals that I wind up happily rereading.  So, I think that The Passion of Artemisia was pretty good, but my recommendation may be more about the how of the painter protagonist than the whom).Luckily, the reason I want to recommend it today is about the how parts.  Vreeland narrates Artemisia’s choices about how to compose her Judith (and a second one later in life).  When she paints Judith, Susanna, and Lucretia, Vreeland’s Artemisia spends a good deal of time deciding how to illustrate the “true drama” that Francis praises.  If I had the book to hand, I’d like to look back at it this week, to see how the compositions she considers and rejects illuminate, in a via negativa kind of way, what elevates and moves Judith, and how women (incuding Vreeland’s Artemisia) use intimate knowledge of woundedness to shape how they exercise their strength.
In this week’s chapter, I was particularly struck by some excerpts from St. Ignatius’s Spiritual Exercises that Pope Francis decided to include:When Saint Ignatius treats of the mysteries of the passion in his Spiritual Exercises, he tells us to ask for “sorrow, regret, and confusion, because the Lord is going to his passion for [our] sins” (SpEx 193).  He also recommends that we request “sorrow with Christ in sorrow, a broken spirit with Christ so broken, tears and interior suffering because of the great suffering that Christ endured for [us]” (SpEx 203).  Our meditation will lead us to “consider what Christ our Lord suffers in his human nature, or desires to suffer,” and we “should begin here with much effort to bring [ourselves] to grief, sorrow, and tears” (SpEx 195).In a casual reading, these lines get very close to the worry that Catholicism can wind up wallowing in suffering and the grotesque.  If Christ died to set us free and unite us to him, why would our response to that act be to request sorrow?  At what point does this kind of spiritual mortification turn in on itself and become a private festival of excess, unlinked from a connection with Christ or anyone else?These kinds of questions came up during my Adult Sunday School class this weekend, when, during a lesson on eschatology, my classmates had plenty of questions about Purgatory, and the role of suffering in sanctification.Here’s part of how I approach these questions — suffering is often a knock-on effect of a good, rather than pursued as an end in itself.  But, because we know it is frequently the side effect of a particular kind of good (understanding and repentance), we develop the (reasonable) disposition of being grateful/longing for it in those circumstances.Let me get a little more concrete.  When I misunderstand a friend, and go around in circles for a while, there’s often a sense of hilarity when we finally unwind all the mishegoss that led us to this point.  When I misunderstand them more severely, and take action that harms one or both of us as a result, there’s a sense of sorrow when I finally catch on, even if there was no malice or negligence involved.  And the pangs of grief are much more acute if I pushed myself into misunderstanding, listening uncharitably or refusing to humble myself to ask for clarification.In each of these circumstances, my unhappiness doesn’t exist in order to punish me, or even to do some kind of strange hedonic account settling.  It’s the natural consequence of both caring for my friend and frustrating their good and mine.  If the sorrow after a stumble were absent, it would be a very bad sign for our friendship, since it would imply I was indifferent to the connection between us.Desiring to enter into Christ’s sorrow is desiring to be aware of the wrongs we’ve done, and to feel the natural sorrow that comes with hurting a friend.  It’s not a desire to luxuriate in guilt or self-pity, but an understanding that we usually flinch away from pain, even to the point of self-deception, so, in order to take an honest look at our actions and to seek full reconciliation, we have to spend some time steering for the “ugh fields” in order to be able to lay ourselves fully before God as a parrhesiastes.
NOT an example of fortitudeIn this week’s reading, Pope Francis’s discussion of Christ’s preparation for death nicely parallels Joseph Pieper’s chapter on Fortitude in The Four Cardinal Virtues.Here’s Francis:Jesus took his death seriously, as he did his life.  Annointed by the Spirit, he was able to discern the signs of the time and was therefore perfectly aware that his “hour” would soon come (cf John 2:4; 7:30; 13:1; Matt 26:45).  Paradoxically, however, we find that Jesus at times “hid himself” to escape public notice and persecution (cf. John 7:1; 8:59).  Jesus was no coward, but neither was he suicidal  He was hiding from the police, from the assassins, from his enemies, because his hour had still not arrived.  The thought of death distressed him (John 12:27), but he accepted the divine will; he left everything in the hands of his Father.  He knew that he was going to die, but he did not hand himself over recklessly.And here’s Pieper:If the specific character of fortitude consists in suffering injuries in the battle for the realization of the good, then the brave man must first know what the good is, and he must be brave for the sake of the good.  “It is for the sake of the good that the brave man exposes himself to the danger of death.”  “In overcoming danger, fortitude seeks not danger itself, but the realization of rational good.”  “To take death upon oneself is not itself praiseworthy, but solely because of its subordination to good.”  It is not the injury that matters primarily, but the realization of the good.Therefore fortitude, though it puts man to the severest test, is not the first and greatest of the virtues.  For neither difficulty nor effort causes virtue, but the good alone.It’s customary for many Catholics to fast or engage in some other kind of penitential practice during Advent (which began yesterday).   And, for me at least, it’s tempting to use difficulty as my guide to what would be a good discipline for Advent.  After all, penitential preparation is about doing something hard right?  And mortifying my will?But, as Pope Francis and Pieper remind me, I’m not exercising my will simply for the sake of making it stronger along any dimension.  I’m trying to reshape it and order it to the good.  I could commit to running for a half-hour every day (I’m definitely not) or taking up a restrictive fast, and either of those practices would be difficult and intrusive (and the running would actually be pretty good for me), but neither does much to educate my will and build up my prudence.As Pieper explains, prudence isn’t simple pragmatism, it’s accurate knowledge of/understanding of the world as it actually is.  It’s the prerequisite to bravery, since our bravery is only good insofar as it’s rightly applied.So, in lieu of choosing an Advent practice for the sake of being taxing, I’ve chosen a discipline (I’ll tell you about it tomorrow) that will be pretty invisible if I’m doing it well, is a bit challenging (though not physically), and (hopefully) will educate my conscience in ways that will last past this season. In the meantime, have any of you taken up specific disciplines for Advent?How did you choose?
In this week’s reading, Pope Francis points out that Christ was stripped of more than his clothes when he was executed on the cross:Jesus does not die in Jerusalem, nor is he stoned to death.  He dies as one accursed, “hung on a tree” outside the walls of Jerusalem (cf. Deut 21:22-23).  The punishment imposed by Jewish law for a false prophet and a blasphemer is stoning, but Jesus does not die as a prophet.  Rather, he is put to death as a conspirator, a zealot, a guerrilla fighter against Roman power.  As a contemporary theologian puts it, Jesus’ enemies robbed him of his rightful death.  Not only did they take away his life with a “legal” murder, but they denied him the meaning that he personally gave to his life and his death.  Jesus’s total divestment includes the manner of his death on the cross: he did not even have the final satisfaction of dying in a way that bore witness to the true meaning of his life.Pope Francis goes on to warn his readers that they “must take into account the likelihood of being judged ‘criminals’ as [Christ] was, of being considered ‘antagonistic’ to the common good.”  He’s not telling his audience of priests that they should seek out conflict with worldly powers, but that something has gone a bit wrong if it never comes to them.I’m reminded, reading this week’s chapter, of an aphorism from Umesh Vazirani, “If you’ve never missed a flight, you’re spending too much time in airports.”The religious version of this “Umeshism” might be, “If all your leaders are recognized as religious leaders, you’ve accepted too narrow a sphere for religion.”Christ is executed as a criminal/revolutionary/conspirator because, as Richard Beck writes “Herod didn’t make a mistake.”  Christianity doesn’t go out seeking conventional, worldly power, but the calling Christ brings doesn’t have tidy, limited consequences that can be confined to an hour on Sunday mornings or a home oratory.Christianity [like any philosophy worth its salt] can and should spill over into neutral/secular life, in both the political and personal spheres.  When it prompts questions of “Well, what does that have to do with your religion?” we should be ready with answers. P.S. Today, I’m sending out the first of my once-a-month behind the scenes looks at my book, Arriving at Amen: Seven Catholic Prayers that Even I Can Offer.So, sign up for the emails before 2:30p today, to find out what was the funniest question I got from my copy-editor, and how quickly she identified one of my foibles.
 There are two paragraphs in particular from this week’s chapter that give a pretty good impression of what Pope Francis is talking about when he titled this section “The Failure of Jesus”Our human tendency is to disguise all evidence of the reality that most frustrates us: death.  We need only look at the cemeteries, the gravestones. the monuments to understand the ways in which we seek to embellish our mortality and banish from our minds this ultimate failure of our humanity.  Sometimes we even resort to “canonizing” our dead.  After Saint Peter’s Square, the place where most people are canonized is at wakes: usually the dead person is described as a “saint.”  Of course, he was a saint because now he can’t bother us!  These are just ways of camouflaging the failure that is death.  We use subterfuge to situate our hope outside the sphere of failure, and so we fail to place our hope in God.This means that Christians today must incorporate into their daily lives the conviction that Jesus Christ is fully alive and walking in our midst.  Otherwise, their Christianity will be a pseud0-failure.  If they try to evade the scandalous failure of the cross, which appears to be the total negation of human hope, then they have not truly “hoped against hope.”  If their hope fails, they will seek out a more acceptable kind of failure, failure that can coexist elegantly with universal, all-purpose values.  Such is the failure of religion without devotion.If I want to find an example of the aesthetic of pseudo-failure, I’d go with “Now You Know” from Merrily We Roll Along, where the protagonist’s friends comfort him after his divorce with a chorus of “Best thing that ever could have happened.”  Here, every failure must contain the seeds of some useful lesson or subtle improvement, no need for psalms of desolation and a plea for external help.  Frank and his friends are a long way from Gesthemane  Off-stage, there’s a little of this attitude in the spirit of Silicon Valley that both engendered FailCon and found it ultimately superfluous.  As the NYT reported:Five years ago, Cassandra Phillipps founded FailCon, a one-day conference in San Francisco celebrating failure. Discouraged by a growing chorus of start-up founders promoting their triumphs throughout Silicon Valley, and nervous about her own prospects as an entrepreneur, she craved the stories of people who had flopped. The conference was a success. And every October for the next four years, up to 500 tech start-up newbies have gathered with industry veterans who dish on their “biggest fail” and lead round-table discussions with titles like “How to Conduct Yourself When It All Goes Off the Rails.” But this year, the FailCon event in San Francisco was canceled, and Ms. Phillipps says part of the reason is that failure chatter is now so pervasive in Silicon Valley that a conference almost seems superfluous. “It’s in the lexicon that you’re going to fail,” she says. … Now failure is emerging as a badge of honor among some Silicon Valley start-ups, as entrepreneurs publicly trumpet how they have faced adversity head-on.There is some useful work being done by projects like FailCon.  We’re reluctant to acknowledge and learn from our failures, so it tends to take a special effort to push past ugh fields and seek out disconfirmatory evidence.  But the danger in taking this rose-colored attitude too far is that it leaves us without a story when we find a failure/injury/desolation that we don’t learn from and doesn’t make us stronger. If weakness is usually just a matter of not looking hard enough for the angle, then we won’t understand how to treat other people (or ourselves) when we are genuinely helpless.
 In the second to last chapter of Open Mind, Faithful Heart, Pope Francis draws heavily on the letter to the Hebrews as he discusses Christ’s role as priest to his people.  In fact, I think most of the chapter is simply quotations from that letter.  But this part is from Pope Francis directly:That body, those wounds, that flesh–all are intercession.  What is more, there is no other way of access to the Father except this one.  It is in beholding the flesh of the Son that the Father grants salvation.  It is through the wounds of Christ that we encounter the father.  Fully alive in his glorified flesh, Christ is bringing forth life in our midst as we take part in his flesh and enter in patience into his passion so as to share also in his glorification.Christ breaks with the former priestly tradition by being both priest and sacrifice.  He offers himself, rather than a calf or a dove.  He, who is already whole and holy, is broken so that we can be drawn up after him into healing and life.Part of the way I understood the Incarnation, as I started learning about Christianity, is that Christ, both fully human and fully divine, is a conduit for us (just plain human) to the divine.  There’s no part of our lives that was not shared by Christ (including suffering, sorrow, and death), so we constantly lie tangent to him in his divinity, and the distance to God is always infinitesimal along the interface he provides.(I was pretty heavily influenced by the diagram of the ant and the tessaract from A Wrinkle in Time) The other math-y way I tend to think of it is that, by being incarnate, Christ alters our understanding of what it means to be human.  At baseline, when we start trying to decide what humans are (social animals? political animals?) we wouldn’t include anything that looks like Christ’s own divinity or intimacy with the Godhead.  But, if he’s a member of the set “humans” albeit a very unusual member of the set, the general definition has to be large enough to cover him.I can imagine the sudden recognition of Christ’s membership in the “human” set suddenly distorting all our metrics for briefly summarizing what the members of the set are.  Regular outliers (let alone Georg-ian ones) are bad enough for skewing the mean, but add in someone who’s infinitely good?  The math on the morals of an average human gets ridiculous.It feels a lot like the same kind of absurdity that underlies the divide-by-zero logic of the Christus Victor understanding of the atonement.  Including Christ in a category tends to shatter the category, and, by the time it reforms to fit him, it’s gone through a “sea change, something rich and strange.”Christ’s life and death distorts our old understanding of what it means to be human, like the heavy ball that pulls down a rubber sheet (and starts pulling everything else on the sheet toward it, along the incline).  We’re freer to move toward him, following his example, as he makes all things new. 
I’d like to close with this quote from Francis’s final reflection:There exists a tendency among us to “make things easy.”  We find it easier not to spend too much time considering seriously what the fleshly suffering of Jesus, man and God, was like.  The same thing happens with the glorious body after the resurrection.  Even Jesus’ disciples had doubts about the reality of his body: “they thought they were seeing a ghost” (Luke 24:36-37).  There is a line in Luke’s Gospel that may give us some insight: “They still could not believe it (because of their joy) and were amazed” (Luke 24:41).  Their faith was hobbled by fear of new frustrations, and so they preferred to believe that they were seeing only the spirit of Jesus and not Jesus resurrected in the flesh.  Something similar can happen with us: we are filled with joy at the thought that Jesus, Christ and Lord, is alive among us, but the joy becomes so great that it scares us.  As a result, we camouflage the resurrection, preferring a type of formulaic preaching that fights shy of the vital message that gives us life: Jesus Christ is risen!  We need to apply that saying of Saint Teresa, “a sad saint is a sorry saint,” not just to the “sad saint” but also, and perhaps more commonly, to the “half-happy” saint.  When we as consecrated persons follow the path of “carefully moderating” the joy produced by Jesus’ resurrection, then we run the risk of compensating for our lack of joy by promoting a multitude of “efficient” pastoral projects.  In so doing, we may become simply impresarios of the Gospel, so many “executives” of the kingdom.Throughout this year of Pope Francis readings, his reflections (as well as his actions!) have highlighted the need for the full joy he calls for, and have hinted at what it looks like.  Unfortunately for me, the examples given in the reflections are drawn primarily from Scripture, rather than from modern life, so I have a lot more trouble translating them into action in my own life than I do, say, the lessons in C.S. Lewis’s The Screwtape Letters or Fr. Timothy Gallagher’s The Examen Prayer: Ignatian Wisdom for our Lives Today.Pope Francis’s exhortations help fuel my appetite to live a joyful, Christian life, but I haven’t turned to them for further nourishment.  I suspect that the pontiff would have me draw on Christ’s life directly, through lectio divina (I’m trying!) or Adoration.  I still find both of these pretty hard, and, even as I give them a shot, I prefer to learn by using writers and saints as lenses to focus or filter Christ’s light down into a much smaller point, one I can engage with a little more successfully.  (Chesterton is particularly good, for me, at conveying the ebullient joy that would seem to mark a Teresa-approved saint — a joy that can be sparked off of nearly anything in creation).I’d be curious where commenters go to stoke up their own attention to joy.As for me, in addition to spiritual readings/sacraments/etc, I like babysitting.  I like being around small children, narrating the world with them, and pausing to enjoy it.
